The Amber Spyglass





The Amber Spyglass




The Am­ber Spy­glass

THE AM­BER SPY­GLASS Philip Pull­man

[22 nov 2001, scanned for #bookz] [15 dec 2001, proofed for #bookz by book­leech]

The morn­ing comes, the night de­cays, the watch­men leave their sta­tions; The grave is burst, the spices shed, the linen wrapped up; The bones of death, the cov’ring clay, the sinews shrunk & dry’d Re­viv­ing shake, in­spir­ing move, breath­ing, awak­en­ing, Spring like re­deemed cap­tives when their bonds & bars are burst. Let the slave grind­ing at the mill run out in­to the field, Let him look up in­to the heav­ens & laugh in the bright air; Let the in­chained soul, shut up in dark­ness and in sigh­ing, Whose face has nev­er seen a smile in thir­ty weary years, Rise and look out; his chains are loose, his dun­geon doors are open; And let his wife and chil­dren re­turn from the op­pres­sor’s scourge. They look be­hind at ev­ery step & be­lieve it is a dream, Singing: “The Sun has left his black­ness & has found a fresh­er morn­ing, And the fair Moon re­joic­es in the clear & cloud­less night; For Em­pire is no more, and now the Li­on & Wolf shall cease.”

-from “Amer­ica: A Prophe­cy” by William Blake

O stars, isn’t it from you that the lover’s de­sire for the face of his beloved aris­es? Doesn’t his se­cret in­sight in­to her pure fea­tures come from the pure con­stel­la­tions?

-from “The Third El­egy” by Rain­er Maria Rilke

Fine va­pors es­cape from what­ev­er is do­ing the liv­ing. The night is cold and del­icate and full of an­gels Pound­ing down the liv­ing. The fac­to­ries are all lit up, The chime goes un­heard. We are to­geth­er at last, though far apart.

-from “The Ec­cle­si­ast” by John Ash­bery





The Amber Spyglass





ONE - THE ENCHANTED SLEEPER


In a val­ley shad­ed with rho­do­den­drons, close to the snow line, where a stream milky with melt­wa­ter splashed and where doves and lin­nets flew among the im­mense pines, lay a cave, halfhid­den by the crag above and the stiff heavy leaves that clus­tered be­low.

The woods were full of sound: the stream be­tween the rocks, the wind among the nee­dles of the pine branch­es, the chit­ter of in­sects and the cries of small ar­bo­re­al mam­mals, as well as the bird­song; and from time to time a stronger gust of wind would make one of the branch­es of a cedar or a fir move against an­oth­er and groan like a cel­lo.

It was a place of bril­liant sun­light, nev­er un­dap­pled. Shafts of lemon­gold bril­liance lanced down to the for­est floor be­tween bars and pools of brown­green shade; and the light was nev­er still, nev­er con­stant, be­cause drift­ing mist would of­ten float among the tree­tops, fil­ter­ing all the sun­light to a pearly sheen and brush­ing ev­ery pine cone with mois­ture that glis­tened when the mist lift­ed. Some­times the wet­ness in the clouds con­densed in­to tiny drops half mist and half rain, which float­ed down­ward rather than fell, mak­ing a soft rustling pat­ter among the mil­li­ons of nee­dles.

There was a nar­row path be­side the stream, which led from a vil­lage, lit­tle more than a clus­ter of herds­men’s dwellings, at the foot of the val­ley to a halfmined shrine near the glacier at its head, a place where fad­ed silken flags streamed out in the per­pet­ual winds from the high moun­tains, and of­fer­in­gs of bar­ley cakes and dried tea were placed by pi­ous vil­lagers. An odd ef­fect of the light, the ice, and the va­por en­veloped the head of the val­ley in per­pet­ual rain­bows.

The cave lay some way above the path. Many years be­fore, a holy man had lived there, med­itat­ing and fast­ing and pray­ing, and the place was ven­er­at­ed for the sake of his mem­ory. It was thir­ty feet or so deep, with a dry floor: an ide­al den for a bear or a wolf, but the on­ly crea­tures liv­ing in it for years had been birds and bats.

But the form that was crouch­ing in­side the en­trance, his black eyes watch­ing this way and that, his sharp ears pricked, was nei­ther bird nor bat. The sun­light lay heavy and rich on his lus­trous gold­en fur, and his mon­key hands turned a pine cone this way and that, snap­ping off the scales with sharp fin­gers and scratch­ing out the sweet nuts.

Be­hind him, just be­yond the point where the sun­light reached, Mrs. Coul­ter was heat­ing some wa­ter in a small pan over a naph­tha stove. Her dae­mon ut­tered a warn­ing mur­mur and Mrs. Coul­ter looked up.

Com­ing along the for­est path was a young vil­lage girl. Mrs. Coul­ter knew who she was: Ama had been bring­ing her food for some days now. Mrs. Coul­ter had let it be known when she first ar­rived that she was a holy wom­an en­gaged in med­ita­tion and prayer, and un­der a vow nev­er to speak to a man. Ama was the on­ly per­son whose vis­its she ac­cept­ed.

This time, though, the girl wasn’t alone. Her fa­ther was with her, and while Ama climbed up to the cave, he wait­ed a lit­tle way off.

Ama came to the cave en­trance and bowed.

“My fa­ther sends me with prayers for your good­will,” she said.

“Greet­in­gs, child,” said Mrs. Coul­ter.

The girl was car­ry­ing a bun­dle wrapped in fad­ed cot­ton, which she laid at Mrs. Coul­ter’s feet. Then she held out a lit­tle hunch of flow­ers, a dozen or so anemones bound with a cot­ton thread, and be­gan to speak in a rapid, ner­vous voice. Mrs. Coul­ter un­der­stood some of the lan­guage of these moun­tain peo­ple, but it would nev­er do to let them know how much. So she smiled and mo­tioned to the girl to close her lips and to watch their two dae­mons. The gold­en mon­key was hold­ing out his lit­tle black hand, and Ama’s but­ter­fly dae­mon was flut­ter­ing clos­er and clos­er un­til he set­tled on a horny fore­fin­ger.

The mon­key brought him slow­ly to his ear, and Mrs. Coul­ter felt a tiny stream of un­der­stand­ing flow in­to her mind, clar­ify­ing the girl’s words. The vil­lagers were hap­py for a holy wom­an, such as her­self, to take refuge in the cave, but it was ru­mored that she had a com­pan­ion with her who was in some way dan­ger­ous and pow­er­ful.

It was that which made the vil­lagers afraid. Was this oth­er be­ing Mrs. Coul­ter’s mas­ter, or her ser­vant? Did she mean harm? Why was she there in the first place? Were they go­ing to stay long? Ama con­veyed these ques­tions with a thou­sand mis­giv­in­gs.

A nov­el an­swer oc­curred to Mrs. Coul­ter as the dae­mon’s un­der­stand­ing fil­tered in­to hers. She could tell the truth. Not all of it, nat­ural­ly, but some. She felt a lit­tle quiver of laugh­ter at the idea, but kept it out of her voice as she ex­plained:

“Yes, there is some­one else with me. But there is noth­ing to be afraid of. She is my daugh­ter, and she is un­der a spell that made her fall asleep. We have come here to hide from the en­chanter who put the spell on her, while I try to cure her and keep her from harm. Come and see her, if you like.”

Ama was half­soothed by Mrs. Coul­ter’s soft voice, and hal­fafraid still; and the talk of en­chanters and spells added to the awe she felt. But the gold­en mon­key was hold­ing her dae­mon so gen­tly, and she was cu­ri­ous, be­sides, so she fol­lowed Mrs. Coul­ter in­to the cave.

Her fa­ther, on the path be­low, took a step for­ward, and his crow dae­mon raised her wings once or twice, but he stayed where he was.

Mrs. Coul­ter lit a can­dle, be­cause the light was fad­ing rapid­ly, and led Ama to the back of the cave. Ama’s eyes glit­tered wide­ly in the gloom, and her hands were mov­ing to­geth­er in a repet­itive ges­ture of fin­ger on thumb, fin­ger on thumb, to ward off dan­ger by con­fus­ing the evil spir­its.

“You see?” said Mrs. Coul­ter. “She can do no harm. There’s noth­ing to be afraid of.”

Ama looked at the fig­ure in the sleep­ing bag. It was a girl old­er than she was, by three or four years, per­haps; and she had hair of a col­or Ama had nev­er seen be­fore, a tawny fair­ness like a li­on’s. Her lips were pressed tight­ly to­geth­er, and she was deeply asleep, there was no doubt about that, for her dae­mon lay coiled and un­con­scious at her throat. He had the form of some crea­ture like a mon­goose, but red­gold in col­or and small­er. The gold­en mon­key was ten­der­ly smooth­ing the fur be­tween the sleep­ing dae­mon’s ears, and as Ama looked, the mon­goose crea­ture stirred un­easi­ly and ut­tered a hoarse lit­tle mew. Ama’s dae­mon, mouse­formed, pressed him­self close to Ama’s neck and peered fear­ful­ly through her hair.

“So you can tell your fa­ther what you’ve seen,” Mrs. Coul­ter went on. “No evil spir­it. Just my daugh­ter, asleep un­der a spell, and in my care. But, please, Ama, tell your fa­ther that this must be a se­cret. No one but you two must know Lyra is here. If the en­chanter knew where she was, he would seek her out and de­stroy her, and me, and ev­ery­thing near­by. So hush! Tell your fa­ther, and no one else.”

She knelt be­side Lyra and smoothed the damp hair back from the sleep­ing face be­fore bend­ing low to kiss her daugh­ter’s cheek. Then she looked up with sad and lov­ing eyes, and smiled at Ama with such brave, wise com­pas­sion that the lit­tle girl felt tears fill her gaze.

Mrs. Coul­ter took Ama’s hand as they went back to the cave en­trance, and saw the girl’s fa­ther watch­ing anx­ious­ly from be­low. The wom­an put her hands to­geth­er and bowed to him, and he re­spond­ed with re­lief as his daugh­ter, hav­ing bowed both to Mrs. Coul­ter and to the en­chant­ed sleep­er, turned and scam­pered down the slope in the twi­light. Fa­ther and daugh­ter bowed once more to the cave and then set off, to van­ish among the gloom of the heavy rho­do­den­drons.

Mrs. Coul­ter turned back to the wa­ter on her stove, which was near­ly at the boil.

Crouch­ing down, she crum­bled some dried leaves in­to it, two pinch­es from this bag, one from that, and added three drops of a pale yel­low oil. She stirred it briskly, count­ing in her head till five min­utes had gone by. Then she took the pan off the stove and sat down to wait for the liq­uid to cool.

Around her there lay some of the equip­ment from the camp by the blue lake where Sir Charles La­trom had died: a sleep­ing bag, a ruck­sack with changes of clothes and wash­ing equip­ment, and so on. There was al­so a case of can­vas with a tough wood­en frame, lined with kapok, con­tain­ing var­ious in­stru­ments; and there was a pis­tol in a hol­ster.

The de­coc­tion cooled rapid­ly in the thin air, and as soon as it was at blood heat, she poured it care­ful­ly in­to a met­al beaker and car­ried it to the rear of the cave. The mon­key dae­mon dropped his pine cone and came with her.

Mrs. Coul­ter placed the beaker care­ful­ly on a low rock and knelt be­side the sleep­ing Lyra. The gold­en mon­key crouched on her oth­er side, ready to seize Pan­ta­lai­mon if he woke up.

Lyra’s hair was damp, and her eyes moved be­hind their closed lids. She was be­gin­ning to stir: Mrs. Coul­ter had felt her eye­lash­es flut­ter when she’d kissed her, and knew she didn’t have long be­fore Lyra woke up al­to­geth­er.

She slipped a hand un­der the girl’s head, and with the oth­er lift­ed the damp strands of hair off her fore­head. Lyra’s lips part­ed and she moaned soft­ly; Pan­ta­lai­mon moved a lit­tle clos­er to her breast. The gold­en mon­key’s eyes nev­er left Lyra’s dae­mon, and his lit­tle black fin­gers twitched at the edge of the sleep­ing bag.

A look from Mrs. Coul­ter, and he let go and moved back a hand’s breadth. The wom­an gen­tly lift­ed her daugh­ter so that her shoul­ders were off the ground and her head lolled, and then Lyra caught her breath and her eyes hal­fopened, flut­ter­ing, heavy.

“Roger,” she mur­mured. “Roger… where are you… I can’t see…”

“Shh,” her moth­er whis­pered, “shh, my dar­ling, drink this.”

Hold­ing the beaker in Lyra’s mouth, she tilt­ed it to let a drop moist­en the girl’s lips. Lyra’s tongue sensed it and moved to lick them, and then Mrs. Coul­ter let a lit­tle more of the liq­uid trick­le in­to Lyra’s mouth, very care­ful­ly, let­ting her sw­al­low each sip be­fore al­low­ing her more.

It took sev­er­al min­utes, but even­tu­al­ly the beaker was emp­ty, and Mrs. Coul­ter laid her daugh­ter down again. As soon as Lyra’s head lay on the ground, Pan­ta­lai­mon moved back around her throat. His red­gold fur was as damp as her hair. They were deeply asleep again.

The gold­en mon­key picked his way light­ly to the mouth of the cave and sat once more watch­ing the path. Mrs. Coul­ter dipped a flan­nel in a basin of cold wa­ter and mopped Lyra’s face, and then un­fas­tened the sleep­ing bag and washed Lyra’s arms and neck and shoul­ders, for Lyra was hot. Then her moth­er took a comb and gen­tly teased out the tan­gles in Lyra’s hair, smooth­ing it back from her fore­head, part­ing it neat­ly.

She left the sleep­ing hag open so the girl could cool down, and un­fold­ed the bun­dle that Ama had brought: some flat loaves of bread, a cake of com­pressed tea, some sticky rice wrapped in a large leaf. It was time to build the fire. The chill of the moun­tains was fierce at night. Work­ing me­thod­ical­ly, she shaved some dry tin­der, set the fire, and struck a match. That was some­thing else to think of: the match­es were run­ning out, and so was the naph­tha for the stove; she must keep the fire alight day and night from now on.

Her dae­mon was dis­con­tent­ed. He didn’t like what she was do­ing here in the cave, and when he tried to ex­press his con­cern, she brushed him away. He turned his back, con­tempt in ev­ery line of his body as he flicked the scales from his pine cone out in­to the dark. She took no no­tice, but worked stea­di­ly and skill­ful­ly to build up the fire and set the pan to heat some wa­ter for tea.

Nev­er­the­less, his skep­ti­cism af­fect­ed her, and as she crum­bled the dark gray tea brick in­to the wa­ter, she won­dered what in the world she thought she was do­ing, and whether she had gone mad, and, over and over again, what would hap­pen when the Church found out. The gold­en mon­key was right. She wasn’t on­ly hid­ing Lyra: she was hid­ing her own eyes.

Out of the dark the lit­tle boy came, hope­ful and fright­ened, whis­per­ing over and over:

“Lyra, Lyra, Lyra… “

Be­hind him there were oth­er fig­ures, even more shad­owy than he was, even more silent. They seemed to be of the same com­pa­ny and of the same kind, but they had no faces that were vis­ible and no voic­es that spoke; and his voice nev­er rose above a whis­per, and his face was shad­ed and blurred like some­thing half­for­got­ten.

“Lyra… Lyra…”

Where were they?

On a great plain, where no light shone from the iron­dark sky, and where a mist ob­scured the hori­zon on ev­ery side. The ground was bare earth, beat­en flat by the pres­sure of mil­li­ons of feet, even though those feet had less weight than feath­ers; so it must have been time that pressed it flat, even though time had been stilled in this place; so it must have been the way things were. This was the end of all places and the last of all worlds.

“Lyra…”

Why were they there?

They were im­pris­oned. Some­one had com­mit­ted a crime, though no one knew what it was, or who had done it, or what au­thor­ity sat in judg­ment.

Why did the lit­tle boy keep call­ing Lyra’s name?

Hope.

Who were they?

Ghosts.

And Lyra couldn’t touch them, no mat­ter how she tried. Her baf­fled hands moved through and through, and still the lit­tle boy stood there plead­ing.

“Roger,” she said, but her voice came out in a whis­per. “Oh, Roger, where are you? What is this place?”

He said, “It’s the world of the dead, Lyra, I dun­no what to do, I dun­no if I’m here for­ev­er, and I dun­no if I done bad things or what, be­cause I tried to be good, but I hate it, I’m scared of it all, I hate it…

And Lyra said, “I’ll





The Amber Spyglass





TWO - BALTHAMOS AND BARUCH


“Be qui­et,” said Will, “just be qui­et. Don’t dis­turb me.”

It was just af­ter Lyra had been tak­en, just af­ter Will had come down from the moun­tain­top, just af­ter the witch had killed his fa­ther. Will lit the lit­tle tin lantern he’d tak­en from his fa­ther’s pack, us­ing the dry match­es that he’d found with it, and crouched in the lee of the rock to open Lyra’s ruck­sack.

He felt in­side with his good hand and found the heavy vel­vetwrapped alethiome­ter. It glit­tered in the lantern light, and he held it out to the two shapes that stood be­side him, the shapes who called them­selves an­gels.

“Can you read this?” he said.

“No,” said a voice. “Come with us. You must come. Come now to Lord As­riel.”

“Who made you fol­low my fa­ther? You said he didn’t know you were fol­low­ing him. But he did,” Will said fierce­ly. “He told me to ex­pect you. He knew more than you thought. Who sent you?”

“No one sent us. Our­selves on­ly,” came the voice. “We want to serve Lord As­riel. And the dead man, what did he want you to do with the knife?”

Will had to hes­itate.

“He said I should take it to Lord As­riel,” he said.

“Then come with us.”

“No. Not till I’ve found Lyra.”

He fold­ed the vel­vet over the alethiome­ter and put it in­to his ruck­sack. Se­cur­ing it, he swung his fa­ther’s heavy cloak around him against the rain and crouched where he was, look­ing stea­di­ly at the two shad­ows.

“Do you tell the truth?” he said.

“Yes.”

“Then are you stronger than hu­man be­in­gs, or weak­er?”

“Weak­er. You have true flesh, we have not. Still, you must come with us.”

“No. If I’m stronger, you have to obey me. Be­sides, I have the knife. So I can com­mand you: help me find Lyra. I don’t care how long it takes, I’ll find her first and then I’ll go to Lord As­riel.”

The two fig­ures were silent for sev­er­al sec­onds. Then they drift­ed away and spoke to­geth­er, though Will could hear noth­ing of what they said.

Fi­nal­ly they came close again, and he heard:

“Very well. You are mak­ing a mis­take, though you give us no choice. We shall help you find this child.”

Will tried to pierce the dark­ness and see them more clear­ly, but the rain filled his eyes.

“Come clos­er so I can see you,” he said.

They ap­proached, but seemed to be­come even more ob­scure.

“Shall I see you bet­ter in day­light?”

“No, worse. We are not of a high or­der among an­gels.”

“Well, if I can’t see you, no one else will, ei­ther, so you can stay hid­den. Go and see if you can find where Lyra’s gone. She sure­ly can’t be far away. There was a wom­an, she’ll be with her, the wom­an took her. Go and search, and come back and tell me what you see.”

The an­gels rose up in­to the stormy air and van­ished. Will felt a great sullen heav­iness set­tle over him; he’d had lit­tle strength left be­fore the fight with his fa­ther, and now he was near­ly fin­ished. All he want­ed to do was close his eyes, which were so heavy and so sore with weep­ing.

He tugged the cloak over his head, clutched the ruck­sack to his breast, and fell asleep in a mo­ment.

“Nowhere,” said a voice.

Will heard it in the depths of sleep and strug­gled to wake. Even­tu­al­ly (and it took most of a minute, be­cause he was so pro­found­ly un­con­scious) he man­aged to open his eyes to the bright morn­ing in front of him.

“Where are you?” he said.

“Be­side you,” said the an­gel. “This way.”

The sun was new­ly risen, and the rocks and the lichens and moss­es on them shone crisp and bril­liant in the morn­ing light, but nowhere could he see a fig­ure.

“I said we would be hard­er to see in day­light,” the voice went on. “You will see us best at halflight, at dusk or dawn; next best in dark­ness; least of all in the sun­shine. My com­pan­ion and I searched far­ther down the moun­tain, and found nei­ther wom­an nor child. But there is a lake of blue wa­ter where she must have camped. There is a dead man there, and a witch eat­en by a Specter.”

“A dead man? What does he look like?”

“He was in late mid­dle age. Fleshy and smooth­skinned. Sil­vergray hair. Dressed in ex­pen­sive clothes, and with traces of a heavy scent around him.”

“Sir Charles,” said Will. “That’s who it is. Mrs. Coul­ter must have killed him. Well, that’s some­thing good, at least.”

“She left traces. My com­pan­ion has fol­lowed them, and he will re­turn when he’s found out where she went. I shall stay with you.”

Will got to his feet and looked around. The storm had cleared the air, and the morn­ing was fresh and clean, which on­ly made the scene around him more dis­tress­ing; for near­by lay the bod­ies of sev­er­al of the witch­es who had es­cort­ed him and Lyra to­ward the meet­ing with his fa­ther. Al­ready a bru­tal­beaked car­ri­on crow was tear­ing at the face of one of them, and Will could see a big­ger bird cir­cling above, as if choos­ing the rich­est feast.

Will looked at each of the bod­ies in turn, but none of them was Ser­afi­na Pekkala, the queen of the witch clan, Lyra’s par­tic­ular friend. Then he re­mem­bered: hadn’t she left sud­den­ly on an­oth­er er­rand, not long be­fore the evening?

So she might still be alive. The thought cheered him, and he scanned the hori­zon for any sign of her, but found noth­ing but the blue air and the sharp rock in ev­ery di­rec­tion he looked.

“Where are you?” he said to the an­gel.

“Be­side you,” came the voice, “as al­ways.”

Will looked to his left, where the voice was, but saw noth­ing.

“So no one can see you. Could any­one else hear you as well as me?”

“Not if I whis­per,” said the an­gel tart­ly.

“What is your name? Do you have names?”

“Yes, we do. My name is Balthamos. My com­pan­ion is Baruch.”

Will con­sid­ered what to do. When you choose one way out of many, all the ways you don’t take are snuffed out like can­dles, as if they’d nev­er ex­ist­ed. At the mo­ment all Will’s choic­es ex­ist­ed at once. But to keep them all in ex­is­tence meant do­ing noth­ing. He had to choose, af­ter all.

“We’ll go back down the moun­tain,” he said. “We’ll go to that lake. There might be some­thing there I can use. And I’m get­ting thirsty any­way. I’ll take the way I think it is and you can guide me if I go wrong.”

It was on­ly when he’d been walk­ing for sev­er­al min­utes down the path­less, rocky slope that Will re­al­ized his hand wasn’t hurt­ing. In fact, he hadn’t thought of his wound since he woke up.

He stopped and looked at the rough cloth that his fa­ther had bound around it af­ter their fight. It was greasy with the oint­ment he’d spread on it, but there was not a sign of blood; and af­ter the in­ces­sant bleed­ing he’d un­der­gone since the fin­gers had been lost, this was so wel­come that he felt his heart leap al­most with joy.

He moved his fin­gers ex­per­imen­tal­ly. True, the wounds still hurt, but with a dif­fer­ent qual­ity of pain: not the deep life­sap­ping ache of the day be­fore, but a small­er, duller sen­sa­tion. It felt as if it were heal­ing. His fa­ther had done that. The witch­es’ spell had failed, but his fa­ther had healed him.

He moved on down the slope, cheered.

It took three hours, and sev­er­al words of guid­an­ce, be­fore he came to the lit­tle blue lake. By the time he reached it, he was parched with thirst, and in the bak­ing sun the cloak was heavy and hot, though when he took it off, he missed its cov­er, for his bare arms and neck were soon burn­ing. He dropped cloak and ruck­sack and ran the last few yards to the wa­ter, to fall on his face and sw­al­low mouth­ful af­ter freez­ing mouth­ful. It was so cold that it made his teeth and skull ache.

Once he’d slaked the thirst, he sat up and looked around. He’d been in no con­di­tion to no­tice things the day be­fore, but now he saw more clear­ly the in­tense col­or of the wa­ter, and heard the stri­dent in­sect nois­es from all around.

“Balthamos?”

“Al­ways here.”

“Where is the dead man?”

“Be­yond the high rock on your right.”

“Are there any Specters around?”

“No, none. I don’t have any­thing the Specters want, and nor have you.”

Will took up his ruck­sack and cloak and made his way along the edge of the lake and up on­to the rock Balthamos had point­ed out.

Be­yond it a lit­tle camp had been set up, with five or six tents and the re­mains of cook­ing fires. Will moved down war­ily in case there was some­one still alive and hid­ing.

But the si­lence was pro­found, with the in­sect scrap­in­gs on­ly scratch­ing at the sur­face of it. The tents were still, the wa­ter was placid, with the rip­ples still drift­ing slow­ly out from where he’d been drink­ing. A flick­er of green move­ment near his foot made him start briefly, but it was on­ly a tiny lizard.

The tents were made of cam­ou­flage ma­te­ri­al, which on­ly made them stand out more among the dull red rocks. He looked in the first and found it emp­ty. So was the sec­ond, but in the third he found some­thing valu­able: a mess tin and a box of match­es. There was al­so a strip of some dark sub­stance as long and as thick as his fore­arm. At first he thought it was leather, but in the sun­light he saw it clear­ly to be dried meat.

Well, he had a knife, af­ter all. He cut a thin sliv­er and found it chewy and very slight­ly salty, but full of good fla­vor. He put the meat and the match­es to­geth­er with the mess tin in­to his ruck­sack and searched the oth­er tents, but found them emp­ty.

He left the largest till last.

“Is that where the dead man is?” he said to the air.

“Yes,” said Balthamos. “He has been poi­soned.”

Will walked care­ful­ly around to the en­trance, which faced the lake. Sprawled be­side an over­turned can­vas chair was the body of the man known in Will’s world as Sir Charles La­trom, and in Lyra’s as Lord Bo­re­al, the man who stole her alethiome­ter, which theft in turn led Will to the sub­tle knife it­self. Sir Charles had been smooth, dis­hon­est, and pow­er­ful, and now he was dead. His face was dis­tort­ed un­pleas­ant­ly, and Will didn’t want to look at it, but a glance in­side the tent showed that there were plen­ty of things to steal, so he stepped over the body to look more close­ly.

His fa­ther, the sol­di­er, the ex­plor­er, would have known ex­act­ly what to take. Will had to guess. He took a small mag­ni­fy­ing glass in a steel case, be­cause he could use it to light fires and save his match­es; a reel of tough twine; an al­loy can­teen for wa­ter, much lighter than the goatskin flask he had been car­ry­ing, and a small tin cup; a small pair of binoc­ulars; a roll of gold coins the size of a man’s thumb, wrapped in pa­per; a firstaid kit; wa­ter­pu­ri­fy­ing tablets; a pack­et of cof­fee; three packs of com­pressed dried fruit; a bag of oat­meal bis­cuits; six bars of Kendal Mint Cake; a pack­et of fish­hooks and ny­lon line; and fi­nal­ly, a note­book and a cou­ple of pen­cils, and a small elec­tric torch.

He packed it all in his ruck­sack, cut an­oth­er sliv­er of meat, filled his bel­ly and then his can­teen from the lake, and said to Balthamos:

“Do you think I need any­thing else?”

“You could do with some sense,” came the re­ply. “Some fac­ul­ty to en­able you to rec­og­nize wis­dom and in­cline you to re­spect and obey it.”

“Are you wise?”

“Much more so than you.”

“Well, you see, I can’t tell. Are you a man? You sound like a man.”

“Baruch was a man. I was not. Now he is an­gel­ic.”

“So… Will stopped what he was do­ing, which was ar­rang­ing his ruck­sack so the heav­iest ob­jects were in the bot­tom, and tried to see the an­gel. There was noth­ing there to see. “So he was a man,” he went on, “and then… Do peo­ple be­come an­gels when they die? Is that what hap­pens?”

“Not al­ways. Not in the vast ma­jor­ity of cas­es…Very rarely.”

“When was he alive, then?”

“Four thou­sand years ago, more or less. I am much old­er.”

“And did he live in my world? Or Lyra’s? Or this one?”

“In yours. But there are myr­iads of worlds. You know that.”

“But how do peo­ple be­come an­gels?”

“What is the point of this meta­phys­ical spec­ula­tion?”

“I just want to know.”

“Bet­ter to stick to your task. You have plun­dered this dead man’s prop­er­ty, you have all the toys you need to keep you alive; now may we move on?”

“When I know which way to go.”

“Whichev­er way we go, Baruch will find us.”

“Then he’ll still find us if we stay here. I’ve got a cou­ple more things to do.”

Will sat down where he couldn’t see Sir Charles’s body and ate three squares of the Kendal Mint Cake. It was won­der­ful how re­freshed and strength­ened he felt as the food be­gan to nour­ish him. Then he looked at the alethiome­ter again. The thir­tysix lit­tle pic­tures paint­ed on ivory were each per­fect­ly clear: there was no doubt that this was a ba­by, that a pup­pet, this a loaf of bread, and so on. It was what they meant that was ob­scure.

“How did Lyra read this?” he said to Balthamos.

“Quite pos­si­bly she made it up. Those who use these in­stru­ments have stud­ied for many years, and even then they can on­ly un­der­stand them with the help of many books of ref­er­ence.”

“She wasn’t mak­ing it up. She read it tru­ly. She told me things she could nev­er have known oth­er­wise.”

“Then it is as much of a mys­tery to me, I as­sure you,” said the an­gel.

Look­ing at the alethiome­ter, Will re­mem­bered some­thing Lyra had said about read­ing it: some­thing about the state of mind she had to be in to make it work. It had helped him, in turn, to feel the sub­tleties of the sil­ver blade.

Feel­ing cu­ri­ous, he took out the knife and cut a small win­dow in front of where he was sit­ting. Through it he saw noth­ing but blue air, but be­low, far be­low, was a land­scape of trees and fields: his own world, with­out a doubt.

So moun­tains in this world didn’t cor­re­spond to moun­tains in his. He closed the win­dow, us­ing his left hand for the first time. The joy of be­ing able to use it again!

Then an idea came to him so sud­den­ly it felt like an elec­tric shock.

If there were myr­iads of worlds, why did the knife on­ly open win­dows be­tween this one and his own?

Sure­ly it should cut in­to any of them.

He held it up again, let­ting his mind flow along to the very tip of the blade as Gi­aco­mo Par­adisi had told him, un­til his con­scious­ness nes­tled among the atoms them­selves and he felt ev­ery tiny snag and rip­ple in the air.

In­stead of cut­ting as soon as he felt the first lit­tle halt, as he usu­al­ly did, he let the knife move on to an­oth­er and an­oth­er. It was like trac­ing a row of stitch­es while press­ing so soft­ly that none of them was harmed.

“What are you do­ing?” said the voice from the air, bring­ing him back.

“Ex­plor­ing,” said Will. “Be qui­et and keep out of the way. If you come near this you’ll get cut, and if I can’t see you, I can’t avoid you.”

Balthamos made a sound of mut­ed dis­con­tent. Will held out the knife again and felt for those tiny halts and hes­ita­tions.

There were far more of them than he’d thought. And as he felt them with­out the need to cut through at once, he found that they each had a dif­fer­ent qual­ity: this one was hard and def­inite, that one cloudy; a third was slip­pery, a fourth brit­tle and frail…

But among them all there were some he felt more eas­ily than oth­ers, and, al­ready know­ing the an­swer, he cut one through to be sure: his own world again.

He closed it up and felt with the knife tip for a snag with a dif­fer­ent qual­ity. He found one that was elas­tic and re­sis­tant, and let the knife feel its way through.

And yes! The world he saw through that win­dow was not his own: the ground was clos­er here, and the land­scape was not green fields and hedges but a desert of rolling dunes.

He closed it and opened an­oth­er: the smoke­laden air over an in­dus­tri­al city, with a line of chained and sullen work­ers trudg­ing in­to a fac­to­ry.

He closed that one, too, and came back to him­self. He felt a lit­tle dizzy. For the first time he un­der­stood some of the true pow­er of the knife, and laid it very care­ful­ly on the rock in front of him.

“Are you go­ing to stay here all day?” said Balthamos.

“I’m think­ing. You can on­ly move eas­ily from one world to an­oth­er if the ground’s in the same place. And maybe there are places where it is, and maybe that’s where a lot of cut­tingth­rough hap­pens… And you’d have to know what your own world felt like with the point or you might nev­er get back. You’d be lost for­ev­er.”

“In­deed. But may we…

“And you’d have to know which world had the ground in the same place, or there wouldn’t be any point in open­ing it,” said Will, as much to him­self as to the an­gel. “So it’s not as easy as I thought. We were just lucky in Ox­ford and Cit­tagazze, maybe. But I’ll just…”

He picked up the knife again. As well as the clear and ob­vi­ous feel­ing he got when he touched a point that would open to his own world, there had been an­oth­er kind of sen­sa­tion he’d touched more than once: a qual­ity of res­onance, like the feel­ing of strik­ing a heavy wood­en drum, ex­cept of course that it came, like ev­ery oth­er one, in the ti­ni­est move­ment through the emp­ty air.

There it was. He moved away and felt some­where else: there it was again.

He cut through and found that his guess was right. The res­onance meant that the ground in the world he’d opened was in the same place as this one. He found him­self look­ing at a grassy up­land mead­ow un­der an over­cast sky, in which a herd of placid beasts was graz­ing, an­imals such as he’d nev­er seen be­fore, crea­tures the size of bi­son, with wide horns and shag­gy blue fur and a crest of stiff hair along their backs.

He stepped through. The near­est an­imal looked up in­cu­ri­ous­ly and then turned back to the grass. Leav­ing the win­dow open, Will, in the oth­er­world mead­ow, felt with the knife­point for the fa­mil­iar snags and tried them.

Yes, he could open his own world from this one, and he was still high above the farms and hedges; and yes, he could eas­ily find the sol­id res­onance that meant the Cit­tagazze­world he’d just left.

With a deep sense of re­lief, Will went back to the camp by the lake, clos­ing ev­ery­thing be­hind him. Now he could find his way home; now he would not get lost; now he could hide when he need­ed to, and move about safe­ly.

With ev­ery in­crease in his knowl­edge came a gain in strength. He sheathed the knife at his waist and swung the ruck­sack over his shoul­der.

“Well, are you ready now?” said that sar­cas­tic voice.

“Yes. I’ll ex­plain if you like, but you don’t seem very in­ter­est­ed.”

“Oh, I find what­ev­er you do a source of per­pet­ual fas­ci­na­tion. But nev­er mind me. What are you go­ing to say to these peo­ple who are com­ing?”

Will looked around, star­tled. Far­ther down the trail, a long way down, there was a line of trav­el­ers with pack­hors­es, mak­ing their way stea­di­ly up to­ward the lake. They hadn’t seen him yet, but if he stayed where he was, they would soon.

Will gath­ered up his fa­ther’s cloak, which he’d laid over a rock in the sun. It weighed much less now that it was dry. He looked around: there was noth­ing else he could car­ry.

“Let’s go far­ther on,” he said.

He would have liked to retie the ban­dage, but it could wait. He set off along the edge of the lake, away from the trav­el­ers, and the an­gel fol­lowed him, in­vis­ible in the bright air.

Much lat­er that day they came down from the bare moun­tains on­to a spur cov­ered in grass and dwarf rho­do­den­drons. Will was aching for rest, and soon, he de­cid­ed, he’d stop.

He’d heard lit­tle from the an­gel. From time to time Balthamos had said, “Not that way,” or “There is an eas­ier path to the left,” and he’d ac­cept­ed the ad­vice; but re­al­ly he was mov­ing for the sake of mov­ing, and to keep away from those trav­el­ers, be­cause un­til the oth­er an­gel came back with more news, he might as well have stayed where they were.

Now the sun was set­ting, he thought he could see his strange com­pan­ion. The out­line of a man seemed to quiver in the light, and the air was thick­er in­side it.

“Balthamos?” he said. “I want to find a stream. Is there one near­by ?”

“There is a spring halfway down the slope,” said the an­gel, “just above those trees.”

“Thank you,” said Will.

He found the spring and drank deeply, fill­ing his can­teen. But be­fore he could go on down to the lit­tle wood, there came an ex­cla­ma­tion from Balthamos, and Will turned to see his out­line dart across the slope to­ward, what? The an­gel was vis­ible on­ly as a flick­er of move­ment, and Will could see him bet­ter when he didn’t look at him di­rect­ly; but he seemed to pause, and lis­ten, and then launch him­self in­to the air to skim back swift­ly to Will.

“Here!” he said, and his voice was free of dis­ap­proval and sar­casm for once. “Baruch came this way! And there is one of those win­dows, al­most in­vis­ible. Come, come. Come now.”

Will fol­lowed ea­ger­ly, his weari­ness for­got­ten. The win­dow, he saw when he reached it, opened on­to a dim, tun­dra­like land­scape that was flat­ter than the moun­tains in the Cit­tagazze world, and cold­er, with an over­cast sky. He went through, and Balthamos fol­lowed him at once.

“Which world is this?” Will said.

“The girl’s own world. This is where they came through. Baruch has gone ahead to fol­low them.”

“How do you know? Do you read his mind?”

“Of course I read his mind. Wher­ev­er he goes, my heart goes with him; we feel as one, though we are two.”

Will looked around. There was no sign of hu­man life, and the chill in the air was in­creas­ing by the minute as the light failed.

“I don’t want to sleep here,” he said. “We’ll stay in the Cit­tagazze world for the night and come through in the morn­ing. At least there’s wood back there, and I can make a fire. And now I know what her world feels like, I can find it with the knife…Oh, Balthamos? Can you take any oth­er shape?”

“Why would I wish to do that?”

“In this world hu­man be­in­gs have dae­mons, and if I go about with­out one, they’ll be sus­pi­cious. Lyra was fright­ened of me at first be­cause of that. So if we’re go­ing to trav­el in her world, you’ll have to pre­tend to be my dae­mon, and take the shape of some an­imal. A bird, maybe. Then you could fly, at least.”

“Oh, how te­dious.”

“Can you, though?”

“I could…”

“Do it now, then. Let me see.”

The form of the an­gel seemed to con­dense and swirl in­to a lit­tle vor­tex in midair, and then a black­bird swooped down on­to the grass at Will’s feet.

“Fly to my shoul­der,” said Will. ”’

The bird did so, and then spoke in the an­gel’s fa­mil­iar acid tone:

“I shall on­ly do this when it’s ab­so­lute­ly nec­es­sary. It’s un­speak­ably hu­mil­iat­ing.”

“Too bad,” said Will. “When­ev­er we see peo­ple in this world, you be­come a bird. There’s no point in fuss­ing or ar­gu­ing. Just do it.”

The black­bird flew off his shoul­der and van­ished in midair, and there was the an­gel again, sulk­ing in the halflight. Be­fore they went back through, Will looked all around, sniff­ing the air, tak­ing the mea­sure of the world where Lyra was cap­tive.

“Where is your com­pan­ion now?” he said.

“Fol­low­ing the wom­an south.”

“Then we shall go that way, too, in the morn­ing.”

Next day Will walked for hours and saw no one. The coun­try con­sist­ed for the most part of low hills cov­ered in short dry grass, and when­ev­er he found him­self on any sort of high point, he looked all around for signs of hu­man habi­ta­tion, but found none. The on­ly vari­ation in the dusty brown­green emp­ti­ness was a dis­tant smudge of dark­er green, which he made for be­cause Balthamos said it was a for­est and there was a riv­er there, which led south. When the sun was at its height, he tried and failed to sleep among some low bush­es; and as the evening ap­proached, he was foot­sore and weary.

“Slow progress,” said Balthamos sourly.

“I can’t help that,” said Will. “If you can’t say any­thing use­ful, don’t speak at all.”

By the time he reached the edge of the for­est, the sun was low and the air heavy with pollen, so much so that he sneezed sev­er­al times, startling a bird that flew up shriek­ing from some­where near­by.

“That was the first liv­ing thing I’ve seen to­day,” Will said.

“Where are you go­ing to camp?” said Balthamos.

The an­gel was oc­ca­sion­al­ly vis­ible now in the long shad­ows of the trees. What Will could see of his ex­pres­sion was petu­lant.

Will said, “I’ll have to stop here some­where. You could help look for a good spot. I can hear a stream, see if you can find it.”

The an­gel dis­ap­peared. Will trudged on, through the low clumps of heather and bog myr­tle, wish­ing there was such a thing as a path for his feet to fol­low, and eye­ing the light with ap­pre­hen­sion: he must choose where to stop soon, or the dark would force him to stop with­out a choice.

“Left,” said Balthamos, an arm’s length away. “A stream and a dead tree for fire­wood. This way…”

Will fol­lowed the an­gel’s voice and soon found the spot he de­scribed. A stream splashed swift­ly be­tween mossy rocks, and dis­ap­peared over a lip in­to a nar­row lit­tle chasm dark un­der the over­ar­ch­ing trees. Be­side the stream, a grassy bank ex­tend­ed a lit­tle way back to bush­es and un­der­growth.

Be­fore he let him­self rest, he set about col­lect­ing wood, and soon came across a cir­cle of charred stones in the grass, where some­one else had made a fire long be­fore. He gath­ered a pile of twigs and heav­ier branch­es and with the knife cut them to a use­ful length be­fore try­ing to get them lit. He didn’t know the best way to go about it, and wast­ed sev­er­al match­es be­fore he man­aged to coax the flames in­to life.

The an­gel watched with a kind of weary pa­tience.

Once the fire was go­ing, Will ate two oat­meal bis­cuits, some dried meat, and some Kendal Mint Cake, wash­ing it down with gulps of cold wa­ter. Balthamos sat near­by, silent, and fi­nal­ly Will said:

“Are you go­ing to watch me all the time? I’m not go­ing any­where.”

“I’m wait­ing for Baruch. He will come back soon, and then I shall ig­nore you, if you like.”

“Would you like some food?”

Balthamos moved slight­ly: he was tempt­ed.

“I mean, I don’t know if you eat at all,” Will said, “but if you’d like some­thing, you’re wel­come.”

“What is that…” said the an­gel fas­tid­ious­ly, in­di­cat­ing the Kendal Mint Cake.

“Most­ly sug­ar, I think, and pep­per­mint. Here.”

Will broke off a square and held it out. Balthamos in­clined his head and sniffed. Then he picked it up, his fin­gers light and cool against Will’s palm.

“I think this will nour­ish me,” he said. “One piece is quite enough, thank you.”

He sat and nib­bled qui­et­ly. Will found that if he looked at the fire, with the an­gel just at the edge of his vi­sion, he had a much stronger im­pres­sion of him.

“Where is Baruch?” he said. “Can he com­mu­ni­cate with you?”

“I feel that he is close. He’ll be here very soon. When he re­turns, we shall talk. Talk­ing is best.”

And bare­ly ten min­utes lat­er the soft sound of wing­beats came to their ears, and Balthamos stood up ea­ger­ly. The next mo­ment, the two an­gels were em­brac­ing, and Will, gaz­ing in­to the flames, saw their mu­tu­al af­fec­tion. More than af­fec­tion: they loved each oth­er with a pas­sion.

Baruch sat down be­side his com­pan­ion, and Will stirred the fire, so that a cloud of smoke drift­ed past the two of them. It had the ef­fect of out­lin­ing their bod­ies so that he could see them both clear­ly for the first time. Balthamos was slen­der; his nar­row wings were fold­ed el­egant­ly be­hind his shoul­ders, and his face bore an ex­pres­sion that min­gled haughty dis­dain with a ten­der, ar­dent sym­pa­thy, as if he would love all things if on­ly his na­ture could let him for­get their de­fects. But he saw no de­fects in Baruch, that was clear. Baruch seemed younger, as Balthamos had said he was, and was more pow­er­ful­ly built, his wings snowwhite and mas­sive. He had a sim­pler na­ture; he looked up to Balthamos as to the fount of all knowl­edge and joy. Will found him­self in­trigued and moved by their love for each oth­er.

“Did you find out where Lyra is?” he said, im­pa­tient for news.

“Yes,” said Baruch. “There is a Hi­malayan val­ley, very high up, near a glacier where the light is turned in­to rain­bows by the ice. I shall draw you a map in the soil so you don’t mis­take it. The girl is cap­tive in a cave among the trees, kept asleep by the wom­an.”

“Asleep? And the wom­an’s alone? No sol­diers with her?”

“Alone, yes. In hid­ing.”

“And Lyra’s not harmed?”

“No. Just asleep, and dream­ing. Let me show you where they are.”

With his pale fin­ger, Baruch traced a map in the bare soil be­side the fire. Will took his note­book and copied it ex­act­ly. It showed a glacier with a cu­ri­ous ser­pen­tine shape, flow­ing down be­tween three al­most iden­ti­cal moun­tain peaks.

“Now,” said the an­gel, “we go clos­er. The val­ley with the cave runs down from the left side of the glacier, and a riv­er of melt­wa­ter runs through it. The head of the val­ley is here…”

He drew an­oth­er map, and Will copied that; and then a third, get­ting clos­er in each time, so that Will felt he could find his way there with­out dif­fi­cul­ty, pro­vid­ed that he’d crossed the four or five thou­sand miles be­tween the tun­dra and the moun­tains. The knife was good for cut­ting be­tween worlds, but it couldn’t abol­ish dis­tance with­in them.

“There is a shrine near the glacier,” Baruch end­ed by say­ing, “with red silk ban­ners halftorn by the winds. And a young girl brings food to the cave. They think the wom­an is a saint who will bless them if they look af­ter her needs.”

“Do they,” said Will. “And she’s hid­ing… That’s what I don’t un­der­stand. Hid­ing from the Church?”

“It seems so.”

Will fold­ed the maps care­ful­ly away. He had set the tin cup on the stones at the edge of the fire to heat some wa­ter, and now he trick­led some pow­dered cof­fee in­to it, stir­ring it with a stick, and wrapped his hand in a hand­ker­chief be­fore pick­ing it up to drink.

A burn­ing stick set­tled in the fire; a night bird called.

Sud­den­ly, for no rea­son Will could see, both an­gels looked up and in the same di­rec­tion. He fol­lowed their gaze, but saw noth­ing. He had seen his cat do this once: look up alert from her half­sleep and watch some­thing or some­one in­vis­ible come in­to the room and walk across. That had made his hair stand up, and so did this.

“Put out the fire,” Balthamos whis­pered.

Will scooped up some earth with his good hand and doused the flames. At once the cold struck in­to his bones, and he be­gan to shiv­er. He pulled the cloak around him­self and looked up again.

And now there was some­thing to see: above the clouds a shape was glow­ing, and it was not the moon.

He heard Baruch mur­mur, “The Char­iot? Could it be?”

“What is it?” Will whis­pered.

Baruch leaned close and whis­pered back, “They know we’re here. They’ve found us. Will, take your knife and…

Be­fore he could fin­ish, some­thing hur­tled out of the sky and crashed in­to Balthamos, In a frac­tion of a sec­ond Baruch had leapt on it, and Balthamos was twist­ing to free his wings. The three be­in­gs fought this way and that in the dim­ness, like great wasps caught in a mighty spi­der’s web, mak­ing no sound: all Will could hear was the break­ing twigs and the brush­ing leaves as they strug­gled to­geth­er.

He couldn’t use the knife: they were all mov­ing too quick­ly. In­stead, he took the elec­tric torch from the ruck­sack and switched it on.

None of them ex­pect­ed that. The at­tack­er threw up his wings, Balthamos flung his arm across his eyes, and on­ly Baruch had the pres­ence of mind to hold on. But Will could see what it was, this en­emy: an­oth­er an­gel, much big­ger and stronger than they were, and Baruch’s hand was clamped over his mouth.

“Will!” cried Balthamos. “The knife … cut a way out …”

And at the same mo­ment the at­tack­er tore him­self free of Baruch’s hands, and cried:

“Lord Re­gent! I have them! Lord Re­gent!”

His voice made Will’s head ring; he had nev­er heard such a cry. And a mo­ment lat­er the an­gel would have sprung in­to the air, but Will dropped his torch and leapt for­ward. He had killed a clif­fghast, but us­ing the knife on a be­ing shaped like him­self was much hard­er. Nev­er­the­less, he gath­ered the great beat­ing wings in­to his arms and slashed again and again at the feath­ers un­til the air was filled with whirling flakes of white, re­mem­ber­ing even in the sweep of vi­olent sen­sa­tions the words of Balthamos: You have true flesh, we have not. Hu­man be­in­gs were stronger than an­gels, stronger even than great pow­ers like this one, and it was true: he was bear­ing the an­gel down to the ground.

The at­tack­er was still shout­ing in that ear­split­ting voice: “Lord Re­gent! To me, to me!”

Will man­aged to glance up­ward and saw the clouds stir­ring and swirling, and that gleam, some­thing im­mense, grow­ing more pow­er­ful, as if the clouds them­selves were be­com­ing lu­mi­nous with en­er­gy, like plas­ma.

Balthamos cried, “Will, come away and cut through, be­fore he comes…

But the an­gel was strug­gling hard, and now he had one wing free and he was forc­ing him­self up from the ground, and Will had to hang on or lose him en­tire­ly. Baruch sprang to help him, and forced the at­tack­er’s head back and back.

“No!” cried Balthamos again. “No! No!”

He hurled him­self at Will, shak­ing his arm, his shoul­der, his hands, and the at­tack­er was try­ing to shout again, but Baruch’s hand was over his mouth. From above came a deep tremor, like a mighty dy­namo, al­most too low to hear, though it shook the very atoms of the air and jolt­ed the mar­row in Will’s bones.

“He’s com­ing… Balthamos said, al­most sob­bing, and now Will did catch some of his fear. “Please, please, Will…

Will looked up.

The clouds were part­ing, and through the dark gap a fig­ure was speed­ing down: small at first, but as it came clos­er sec­ond by sec­ond, the form be­came big­ger and more im­pos­ing. He was mak­ing straight for them, with un­mis­tak­able malev­olence.

“Will, you must,” said Baruch ur­gent­ly.

Will stood up, mean­ing to say “Hold him tight,” but even as the words came to his mind, the an­gel sagged against the ground, dis­solv­ing and spread­ing out like mist, and then he was gone. Will looked around, feel­ing fool­ish and sick.

“Did I kill him?” he said shak­ily.

“You had to,” said Baruch. “But now…

“I hate this,” said Will pas­sion­ate­ly, “tru­ly, tru­ly, I hate this killing! When will it stop?”

“We must go,” said Balthamos faint­ly. “Quick­ly Will, quick­ly, please…

They were both mor­tal­ly afraid.

Will felt in the air with the tip of the knife: any world, out of this one. He cut swift­ly, and looked up: that oth­er an­gel from the sky was on­ly sec­onds away, and his ex­pres­sion was ter­ri­fy­ing. Even from that dis­tance, and even in that ur­gent sec­ond or so, Will felt him­self searched and scoured from one end of his be­ing to the oth­er by some vast, bru­tal, and mer­ci­less in­tel­lect.

And what was more, he had a spear, he was rais­ing it to hurl…

And in the mo­ment it took the an­gel to check his flight and turn up­right and pull back his arm to fling the weapon, Will fol­lowed Baruch and Balthamos through and closed the win­dow be­hind him. As his fin­gers pressed the last inch to­geth­er, he felt a shock of air, but it was gone, he was safe: it was the spear that would have passed through him in that oth­er world.

They were on a sandy beach un­der a bril­liant moon. Gi­ant fern­like trees grew some way in­land; low dunes ex­tend­ed for miles along the shore. It was hot and hu­mid.

“Who was that?” said Will, trem­bling, fac­ing the two an­gels.

“That was Meta­tron,” said Balthamos. “You should have…

“Meta­tron? Who’s he? Why did he at­tack? And don’t lie to me.”

“We must tell him,” said Baruch to his com­pan­ion. “You should have done so al­ready.”

“Yes, I should have,” Balthamos agreed, “but I was cross with him, and anx­ious for you.”

“Tell me now, then,” said Will. “And re­mem­ber, it’s no good telling me what I should do, none of it mat­ters to me, none. On­ly Lyra mat­ters, and my moth­er. And that,” he added to Balthamos, “is the point of all this meta­phys­ical spec­ula­tion, as you called it.”

Baruch said, “I think we should tell you our in­for­ma­tion. Will, this is why we two have been seek­ing you, and why we must take you to Lord As­riel. We dis­cov­ered a se­cret of the King­dom, of the Au­thor­ity’s world, and we must share it with him. Are we safe here?” he added, look­ing around. “There is no way through?”

“This is a dif­fer­ent world. A dif­fer­ent uni­verse.”

The sand they stood on was soft, and the slope of the dune near­by was in­vit­ing. They could see for miles in the moon­light; they were ut­ter­ly alone.

“Tell me, then,” said Will. “Tell me about Meta­tron, and what this se­cret is. Why did that an­gel call him Re­gent? And what is the Au­thor­ity? Is he God?”

He sat down, and the two an­gels, their forms clear­er in the moon­light than he had ev­er seen them be­fore, sat with him.

Balthamos said qui­et­ly, “The Au­thor­ity, God, the Cre­ator, the Lord, Yah­weh, El, Adon­ai, the King, the Fa­ther, the Almighty, those were all names he gave him­self. He was nev­er the cre­ator. He was an an­gel like our­selves, the first an­gel, true, the most pow­er­ful, but he was formed of Dust as we are, and Dust is on­ly a name for what hap­pens when mat­ter be­gins to un­der­stand it­self. Mat­ter loves mat­ter. It seeks to know more about it­self, and Dust is formed. The first an­gels con­densed out of Dust, and the Au­thor­ity was the first of all. He told those who came af­ter him that he had cre­at­ed them, but it was a lie. One of those who came lat­er was wis­er than he was, and she found out the truth, so he ban­ished her. We serve her still. And the Au­thor­ity still reigns in the King­dom, and Meta­tron is his Re­gent.

“But as for what we dis­cov­ered in the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, we can’t tell you the heart of it. We swore to each oth­er that the first to hear should be Lord As­riel him­self.”

“Then tell me what you can. Don’t keep me in the dark.”

“We found our way in­to the Cloud­ed Moun­tain,” said Baruch, and at once went on: “I’m sor­ry; we use these terms too eas­ily. It’s some­times called the Char­iot. It’s not fixed, you see; it moves from place to place. Wher­ev­er it goes, there is the heart of the King­dom, his citadel, his palace. When the Au­thor­ity was young, it wasn’t sur­round­ed by clouds, but as time passed, he gath­ered them around him more and more thick­ly. No one has seen the sum­mit for thou­sands of years. So his citadel is known now as the Cloud­ed Moun­tain.”

“What did you find there?”

“The Au­thor­ity him­self dwells in a cham­ber at the heart of the Moun­tain. We couldn’t get close, al­though we saw him. His pow­er…

“He has del­egat­ed much of his pow­er,” Balthamos in­ter­rupt­ed, “to Meta­tron. You’ve seen what he’s like. We es­caped from him be­fore, and now he’s seen us again, and what is more, he’s seen you, and he’s seen the knife. I did say…

“Balthamos,” said Baruch gen­tly, “don’t chide Will. We need his help, and he can’t be blamed for not know­ing what it took us so long to find out.”

Balthamos looked away.

Will said, “So you’re not go­ing to tell me this se­cret of yours? All right. Tell me this, in­stead: what hap­pens when we die?”

Balthamos looked back, in sur­prise.

Baruch said, “Well, there is a world of the dead. Where it is, and what hap­pens there, no one knows. My ghost, thanks to Balthamos, nev­er went there; I am what was once the ghost of Baruch. The world of the dead is just dark to us.”

“It is a prison camp,” said Balthamos. “The Au­thor­ity es­tab­lished it in the ear­ly ages. Why do you want to know? You will see it in time.”

“My fa­ther has just died, that’s why. He would have told me all he knew, if he hadn’t been killed. You say it’s a world, do you mean a world like this one, an­oth­er uni­verse?”

Balthamos looked at Baruch, who shrugged.

“And what hap­pens in the world of the dead?” Will went on.

“It’s im­pos­si­ble to say,” said Baruch. “Ev­ery­thing about it is se­cret. Even the church­es don’t know; they tell their be­liev­ers that they’ll live in Heav­en, but that’s a lie. If peo­ple re­al­ly knew…”

“And my fa­ther’s ghost has gone there.”

“With­out a doubt, and so have the count­less mil­li­ons who died be­fore him.”

Will found his imag­ina­tion trem­bling.

“And why didn’t you go di­rect­ly to Lord As­riel with your great se­cret, what­ev­er it is,” he said, “in­stead of look­ing for me?”

“We were not sure,” said Balthamos, “that he would be­lieve us un­less we brought him proof of our good in­ten­tions. Two an­gels of low rank, among all the pow­ers he is deal­ing with, why should he take us se­ri­ous­ly? But if we could bring him the knife and its bear­er, he might lis­ten. The knife is a po­tent weapon, and Lord As­riel would be glad to have you on his side.”

“Well, I’m sor­ry,” said Will, “but that sounds fee­ble to me. If you had any con­fi­dence in your se­cret, you wouldn’t need an ex­cuse to see Lord As­riel.”

“There’s an­oth­er rea­son,” said Baruch, “We knew that Meta­tron would be pur­su­ing us, and we want­ed to make sure the knife didn’t fall in­to his hands. If we could per­suade you to come to Lord As­riel first, then at least…

“Oh, no, that’s not go­ing to hap­pen,” said Will. “You’re mak­ing it hard­er for me to reach Lyra, not eas­ier. She’s the most im­por­tant thing, and you’re for­get­ting her com­plete­ly. Well, I’m not. Why don’t you just go to Lord As­riel and leave me alone? Make him lis­ten. You could fly to him much more quick­ly than I can walk, and I’m go­ing to find Lyra first, come what may. just do that, just go, just leave me.”

“But you need me,” said Balthamos stiffly, “be­cause I can pre­tend to be your dae­mon, and in Lyra’s world you’d stand out oth­er­wise.”

Will was too an­gry to speak. He got up and walked twen­ty steps away through the soft, deep sand, and then stopped, for the heat and hu­mid­ity were stun­ning.

He turned around to see the two an­gels talk­ing close­ly to­geth­er, and then they came up to him, hum­ble and awk­ward, but proud, too.

Baruch said, “We are sor­ry. I shall go on my own to Lord As­riel and give him our in­for­ma­tion, and ask him to send you help to find his daugh­ter. It will be two days’ fly­ing time, if I nav­igate tru­ly.”

“And I shall stay with you, Will,” said Balthamos.

“Well,” said Will, “thank you.”

The two an­gels em­braced. Then Baruch fold­ed his arms around Will and kissed him on both cheeks. The kiss was light and cool, like the hands of Balthamos.

“If we keep mov­ing to­ward Lyra,” Will said, “will you find us?

“I shall nev­er lose Balthamos,” said Baruch, and stepped hack.

Then he leapt in­to the air, soared swift­ly in­to the sky, and van­ished among the scat­tered stars. Balthamos was look­ing af­ter him with des­per­ate long­ing.

“Shall we sleep here, or should we move on?” he said fi­nal­ly, turn­ing to Will.

“Sleep here,” said Will.

“Then sleep, and I’ll watch out for dan­ger. Will, I have been short with you, and it was wrong of me. You have the great­est bur­den, and I should help you, not chide you. I shall try to be kinder from now on.”

So Will lay down on the warm sand, and some­where near­by, he thought, the an­gel was keep­ing watch; but that was lit­tle com­fort.

get us out of here, Roger, I promise. And Will’s com­ing, I’m sure he is!”

He didn’t un­der­stand. He spread his pale hands and shook his head.

“I dun­no who that is, and he won’t come here,” he said, “and if he does, he won’t know me.”

“He’s com­ing to me,” she said, “and me and Will, oh, I don’t know how, Roger, but I swear we’ll help. And don’t for­get there’s oth­ers on our side. There’s Ser­afi­na and there’s Iorek, and





The Amber Spyglass





THREE - SCAVENGERS


Ser­afi­na Pekkala, the clan queen of the witch­es of Lake Enara, wept as she flew through the tur­bid skies of the Arc­tic. She wept with rage and fear and re­morse: rage against the wom­an Coul­ter, whom she had sworn to kill; fear of what was hap­pen­ing to her beloved land; and re­morse… She would face the re­morse lat­er.

Mean­while, look­ing down at the melt­ing ice cap, the flood­ed low­land forests, the swollen sea, she felt heart­sick.

But she didn’t stop to vis­it her home­land, or to com­fort and en­cour­age her sis­ters. In­stead, she flew north and far­ther north, in­to the fogs and gales around Sval­bard, the king­dom of Iorek Byr­ni­son, the ar­mored bear.

She hard­ly rec­og­nized the main is­land. The moun­tains lay bare and black, and on­ly a few hid­den val­leys fac­ing away from the sun had re­tained a lit­tle snow in their shad­ed cor­ners; but what was the sun do­ing here any­way, at this time of year? The whole of na­ture was over­turned.

It took her most of a day to find the bear­king. She saw him among the rocks off the north­ern edge of the is­land, swim­ming fast af­ter a wal­rus. It was hard­er for bears to kill in the wa­ter: when the land was cov­ered in ice and the great sea­mam­mals had to come up to breathe, the bears had the ad­van­tage of cam­ou­flage and their prey was out of its el­ement. That was how things should be.

But Iorek Byr­ni­son was hun­gry, and even the stab­bing tusks of the mighty wal­rus couldn’t keep him at bay. Ser­afi­na watched as the crea­tures fought, turn­ing the white sea­spray red, and saw Iorek haul the car­cass out of the waves and on­to a broad shelf of rock, watched at a re­spect­ful dis­tance by three ragged­furred fox­es, wait­ing for their turn at the feast.

When the bear­king had fin­ished eat­ing, Ser­afi­na flew down to speak to him. Now was the time to face her re­morse.

“King Iorek Byr­ni­son,” she said, “please may I speak with you? I lay my weapons down.”

She placed her bow and ar­rows on the wet rock be­tween them. Iorek looked at them briefly, and she knew that if his face could reg­is­ter any emo­tion, it would be sur­prise.

“Speak, Ser­afi­na Pekkala,” he growled. “We have nev­er fought, have we?”

“King Iorek, I have failed your com­rade, Lee Scores­by.”

The bear’s small black eyes and blood­stained muz­zle were very still. She could see the wind ruf­fling the tips of the creamy white hairs along his back. He said noth­ing.

“Mr. Scores­by is dead,” Ser­afi­na went on. “Be­fore I part­ed from him, I gave him a flow­er to sum­mon me with, if he should need me. I heard his call and flew to him, but I ar­rived too late. He died fight­ing a force of Mus­covites, but I know noth­ing of what brought them there, or why he was hold­ing them off when he could eas­ily have es­caped. King Iorek, I am wretched with re­morse.”

“Where did this hap­pen?” said Iorek Byr­ni­son.

“In an­oth­er world. This will take me some time to tell.”

“Then be­gin.”

She told him what Lee Scores­by had set out to do: to find the man who had been known as Sta­nis­laus Grum­man. She told him about how the bar­ri­er be­tween the worlds had been breached by Lord As­riel, and about some of the con­se­quences; the melt­ing of the ice, for ex­am­ple. She told of the witch Ru­ta Ska­di’s flight af­ter the an­gels, and she tried to de­scribe those fly­ing be­in­gs to the bear­king as Ru­ta had de­scribed them to her: the light that shone on them, the crys­talline clar­ity of their ap­pear­an­ce, the rich­ness of their wis­dom.

Then she de­scribed what she had found when she an­swered Lee’s call.

“I put a spell on his body to pre­serve it from cor­rup­tion,” she told him. “It will last un­til you see him, if you wish to do that. But I am trou­bled by this, King Iorek. Trou­bled by ev­ery­thing, but most­ly by this.”

“Where is the child?”

“I left her with my sis­ters, be­cause I had to an­swer Lee’s call.”

“In that same world?”

“Yes, the same.”

“How can I get there from here?”

She ex­plained. Iorek Byr­ni­son lis­tened ex­pres­sion­less­ly, and then said, “I shall go to Lee Scores­by. And then I must go south.”

“South?”

“The ice has gone from these lands. I have been think­ing about this, Ser­afi­na Pekkala. I have char­tered a ship.”

The three lit­tle fox­es had been wait­ing pa­tient­ly. Two of them were ly­ing down, heads on their paws, watch­ing, and the oth­er was still sit­ting up, fol­low­ing the con­ver­sa­tion. The fox­es of the Arc­tic, scav­en­gers that they were, had picked up some lan­guage, but their brains were so formed that they could on­ly un­der­stand state­ments in the present tense. Most of what Iorek and Ser­afi­na said was mean­ing­less noise to them. Fur­ther­more, when they spoke, much of what they said was lies, so it didn’t mat­ter if they re­peat­ed what they’d heard: no one could sort out which parts were true, though the cred­ulous clif­fghasts of­ten be­lieved most of it, and nev­er learned from their dis­ap­point­ment. The bears and the witch­es alike were used to their con­ver­sa­tions be­ing scav­en­ged as well as the meat they’d fin­ished with.

“And you, Ser­afi­na Pekkala?” Iorek went on. “What will you do now?”

“I’m go­ing to find the gyp­tians,” she said. “I think they will be need­ed.”

“Lord Faa,” said the bear, “yes. Good fight­ers. Go well.”

He turned away and slipped in­to the wa­ter with­out a splash, and be­gan to swim in his steady, tire­less pad­dle to­ward the new world.

And some time lat­er, Iorek Byr­ni­son stepped through the black­ened un­der­growth and the heat­split rocks at the edge of a burned for­est. The sun was glar­ing through the smoky haze, but he ig­nored the heat as he ig­nored the char­coal dust that black­ened his white fur and the midges that searched in vain for skin to bite.

He had come a long way, and at one point in his jour­ney, he had found him­self swim­ming in­to that oth­er world. He no­ticed the change in the taste of the wa­ter and the tem­per­ature of the air, but the air was still good to breathe, and the wa­ter still held his body up, so he swam on, and now he had left the sea be­hind and he was near­ly at the place Ser­afi­na Pekkala had de­scribed. He cast around, his black eyes gaz­ing up at the sun­shim­mer­ing rocks and the wall of lime­stone crags above him.

Be­tween the edge of the burned for­est and the moun­tains, a rocky slope of heavy boul­ders and scree was lit­tered with. scorched and twist­ed met­al: gird­ers and struts that had be­longed to some com­plex ma­chine. Iorek Byr­ni­son looked at them as a smith as well as a war­ri­or, but there was noth­ing in these frag­ments he could use. He scored a line with a mighty claw along a strut less dam­aged than most, and feel­ing a flim­si­ness in the qual­ity of the met­al, turned away at once and scanned the moun­tain wall again.

Then he saw what he was look­ing for: a nar­row gul­ly lead­ing back be­tween jagged walls, and at the en­trance, a large, low boul­der.

He clam­bered stea­di­ly to­ward it. Be­neath his huge feet, dry bones snapped loud­ly in the still­ness, be­cause many men had died here, to be picked clean by coy­otes and vul­tures and less­er crea­tures; but the great bear ig­nored them and stepped up care­ful­ly to­ward the rock. The go­ing was loose and he was heavy, and more than once the scree shift­ed un­der his feet and car­ried him down again in a scram­ble of dust and grav­el. But as soon as he slid down, he be­gan to move up once more, re­lent­less­ly, pa­tient­ly, un­til he reached the rock it­self, where the foot­ing was firmer.

The boul­der was pit­ted and chipped with bul­let marks. Ev­ery­thing the witch had told him was true. And in con­fir­ma­tion, a lit­tle Arc­tic flow­er, a pur­ple sax­ifrage, blos­somed im­prob­ably where the witch had plant­ed it as a sig­nal in a cran­ny of the rock.

Iorek Byr­ni­son moved around to the up­per side. It was a good shel­ter from an en­emy be­low, but not good enough; for among the hail of bul­lets that had chipped frag­ments off the rock had been a few that had found their tar­gets and lay where they had come to rest, in the body of the man ly­ing stiff in the shad­ow.

He was a body still, and not a skele­ton, be­cause the witch had laid a spell to pre­serve him from cor­rup­tion. Iorek could see the face of his old com­rade drawn and tight with the pain of his wounds, and see the jagged holes in his gar­ments where the bul­lets had en­tered. The witch’s spell did not cov­er the blood that must have spilled, and in­sects and the sun and the wind had dis­persed it com­plete­ly. Lee Scores­by looked not asleep, nor at peace, he looked as if he had died in bat­tle, but he looked as if he knew that his fight had been suc­cess­ful.

And be­cause the Tex­an aero­naut was one of the very few hu­mans Iorek had ev­er es­teemed, he ac­cept­ed the man’s last gift to him. With deft move­ments of his claws, he ripped aside the dead man’s clothes, opened the body with one slash, and be­gan to feast on the flesh and blood of his old friend. It was his first meal for days, and he was hun­gry.

But a com­plex web of thoughts was weav­ing it­self in the bear­king’s mind, with more strands in it than hunger and sat­is­fac­tion. There was the mem­ory of the lit­tle girl Lyra, whom he had named Sil­ver­tongue, and whom he had last seen cross­ing the frag­ile snow bridge across a crevasse in his own is­land of Sval­bard. Then there was the ag­ita­tion among the witch­es, the ru­mors of pacts and al­liances and war; and then there was the sur­pass­ing­ly strange fact of this new world it­self, and the witch’s in­sis­tence that there were many more such worlds, and that the fate of them all hung some­how on the fate of the child.

And then there was the melt­ing of the ice. He and his peo­ple lived on the ice; ice was their home; ice was their citadel. Since the vast dis­tur­bances in the Arc­tic, the ice had be­gun to dis­ap­pear, and Iorek knew that he had to find an ice­bound fast­ness for his kin, or they would per­ish. Lee had told him | that there were moun­tains in the south so high that even his bal­loon could not fly over them, and they were crowned with | snow and ice all year round. Ex­plor­ing those moun­tains was j his next task.

But for now, some­thing sim­pler pos­sessed his heart, some­thing bright and hard and un­shak­able: vengeance.

Scores­by, who had res­cued Iorek from dan­ger in his bal­loon and fought be­side him in the Arc­tic of his own world, had died. Iorek would avenge him. The good man’s flesh and bone would both nour­ish him and keep him rest­less un­til blood was spilled enough to still his heart.

The sun was set­ting as Iorek fin­ished his meal, and the air was cool­ing down. Af­ter gath­er­ing the re­main­ing frag­ments of Lee’s body in­to a sin­gle heap, the bear lift­ed the flow­er in his mouth and dropped it in the cen­ter of them, as hu­mans liked to do. The witch’s spell was bro­ken now; the rest of the body was free to all who came. Soon it would be nour­ish­ing a dozen dif­fer­ent kinds of life.

Then Iorek set off down the slope to­ward the sea again, to­ward the south.

Clif­fghasts were fond of fox, when they could get it. The lit­tle crea­tures were cun­ning and hard to catch, but their meat was ten­der and rank.

Be­fore he killed this one, the clif­fghast let it talk, and laughed at its sil­ly bab­ble.

“Bear must go south! Swear! Witch is trou­bled! True! Swear! Promise!”

“Bears don’t go south, ly­ing filth!”

“True! King bear must go south! Show you wal­rus, fine fat good…

“King bear go south?”

“And fly­ing things got trea­sure! Fly­ing things, an­gels, crys­tal trea­sure!”

“Fly­ing things, like clif­fghasts? Trea­sure?”

“Like light, not like clif­fghast. Rich! Crys­tal! And witch trou­bled, witch sor­ry, Scores­by dead…

“Dead? Bal­loon man dead?” The clif­fghast’s laugh echoed around the dry cliffs.

“Witch kill him, Scores­by dead, king bear go south… “Scores­by dead! Ha, ha, Scores­by dead!” The clif­fghast wrenched off the fox’s head, and fought his broth­ers for the en­trails.

they will come, they will.”

“But where are you, Lyra?”

And that she couldn’t an­swer. “I think I’m dream­ing, Roger,” was all she could find to say.

Be­hind the lit­tle boy she could see more ghosts, dozens, hun­dreds, their heads crowd­ed to­geth­er, peer­ing close and lis­ten­ing to ev­ery word.

“And that wom­an?” said Roger. “I hope she en’t dead. I hope she stays alive as long as ev­er she can. Be­cause if she comes down here, then there’ll be nowhere to hide, she’ll have us for­ev­er then. That’s the on­ly good thing I can see about be­ing dead, that she en’t. Ex­cept I know she will be one day… “

Lyra was alarmed.

“I think I’m dream­ing, and I don’t know where she is.” she said. “She’s some­where near, and I can’t





The Amber Spyglass





FOUR - AMA AND THE BATS


Ama, the herds­man’s daugh­ter, car­ried the im­age of the sleep­ing girl in her mem­ory: she could not stop think­ing about her. She didn’t ques­tion for a mo­ment the truth of what Mrs. Coul­ter had told her. Sor­cer­ers ex­ist­ed, be­yond a doubt, and it was on­ly too like­ly that they would cast sleep­ing spells, and that a moth­er would care for her daugh­ter in that fierce and ten­der way. Ama con­ceived an ad­mi­ra­tion amount­ing al­most to wor­ship for the beau­ti­ful wom­an in the cave and her en­chant­ed daugh­ter.

She went as of­ten as she could to the lit­tle val­ley, to run er­rands for the wom­an or sim­ply to chat­ter and lis­ten, for the wom­an had won­der­ful tales to tell. Again and again she hoped for a glimpse of the sleep­er, but it had on­ly hap­pened once, and; she ac­cept­ed that it would prob­ably nev­er be al­lowed again.

And dur­ing the time she spent milk­ing the sheep, or card­ing and spin­ning their wool, or grind­ing bar­ley to make bread, she thought in­ces­sant­ly about the spell that must have been cast, and about why it had hap­pened. Mrs. Coul­ter had nev­er told her, so Ama was free to imag­ine.

One day she took some flat bread sweet­ened with hon­ey; walked the three­hour jour­ney along the trail to ChoL­ung Se, where there was a monastery. By wheedling and pa­tience and by brib­ing the porter with some of the hon­ey bread, man­aged to gain an au­di­ence with the great heal­er Pagdzin tulku, who had cured an out­break of the white fever on­ly the year be­fore, and who was im­mense­ly wise.

Ama en­tered the great man’s cell, bow­ing very low and of­fer­ing her re­main­ing hon­ey bread with all the hu­mil­ity she could muster. The monk’s bat dae­mon swooped and dart­ed around her, fright­en­ing her own dae­mon, Ku­lang, who crept in­to her hair to hide, but Ama tried to re­main still and silent un­til Pagdzin tulku spoke.

“Yes, child? Be quick, be quick,” he said, his long gray beard wag­ging with ev­ery word.

In the dim­ness the beard and his bril­liant eyes were most of what she could see of him. His dae­mon set­tled on the beam above him, hang­ing still at last, so she said, “Please, Pagdzin tulku, I want to gain wis­dom. I would like to know how to make spells and en­chant­ments. Can you teach me?”

“No,” he said.

She was ex­pect­ing that. “Well, could you tell me just one rem­edy?” she asked humbly.

“Maybe. But I won’t tell you what it is. I can give you the medicine, not tell you the se­cret.”

“All right, thank you, that is a great bless­ing,” she said, bow­ing sev­er­al times.

“What is the dis­ease, and who has it?” the old man said.

“It’s a sleep­ing sick­ness,” Ama ex­plained. “It’s come up­on the son of my fa­ther’s cousin.”

She was be­ing ex­tra clever, she knew, chang­ing the sex of the suf­fer­er, just in case the heal­er had heard of the wom­an in the cave.

“And how old is this boy?”

“Three years old­er than me, Pagdzin tulku,” she guessed, “so he is twelve years old. He sleeps and sleeps and can’t wake up.”

“Why haven’t his par­ents come to me? Why did they send you?”

“Be­cause they live far on the oth­er side of my vil­lage and they are very poor, Pagdzin tulku. I on­ly heard of my kins­man’s ill­ness yes­ter­day and I came at once to seek your ad­vice.”

“I should see the pa­tient and ex­am­ine him thor­ough­ly, and in­quire in­to the po­si­tions of the plan­ets at the hour when he fell asleep. These things can’t be done in a hur­ry.”

“Is there no medicine you can give me to take back?”

The bat dae­mon fell off her beam and flut­tered black­ly aside be­fore she hit the floor, dart­ing silent­ly across the room again and again, too quick­ly for Ama to fol­low; but the bright eyes of the heal­er saw ex­act­ly where she went, and when she had hung once more up­side down on her beam and fold­ed her dark wings around her­self, the old man got up and moved around from shelf to shelf and jar to jar and box to box, here tap­ping out a spoon­ful of pow­der, there adding a pinch of herbs, in the or­der in which the dae­mon had vis­it­ed them.

He tipped all the in­gre­di­ents in­to a mor­tar and ground them up to­geth­er, mut­ter­ing a spell as he did so. Then he tapped the pes­tle on the ring­ing edge of the mor­tar, dis­lodg­ing the fi­nal grains, and took a brush and ink and wrote some char­ac­ters on a sheet of pa­per. When the ink had dried, he tipped all the pow­der on­to the in­scrip­tion and fold­ed the pa­per swift­ly in­to a lit­tle square pack­age.

“Let them brush this pow­der in­to the nos­trils of the sleep­ing child a lit­tle at a time as he breathes in,” he told her, “and he will wake up. It has to be done with great cau­tion. Too much at once and he will choke. Use the soft­est of brush­es.”

“Thank you, Pagdzin tulku” said Ama, tak­ing the pack­age and plac­ing it in the pock­et of her in­ner­most shirt. “I wish I had an­oth­er hon­ey bread to give you.”

“One is enough,” said the heal­er. “Now go, and next time you come, tell me the whole truth, not part of it.”

The girl was abashed, and bowed very low to hide her con­fu­sion. She hoped she hadn’t giv­en too much away.

Next evening she hur­ried to the val­ley as soon as she could, car­ry­ing some sweet rice wrapped in a heart­fruit leaf. She was burst­ing to tell the wom­an what she had done, and to give her the medicine and re­ceive her praise and thanks, and ea­ger most of all for the en­chant­ed sleep­er to wake and talk to her. They could be friends!

But as she turned the cor­ner of the path and looked up­ward, she saw no gold­en mon­key, no pa­tient wom­an seat­ed at the cave mouth. The place was emp­ty. She ran the last few yards, afraid they had gone for­ev­er, but there was the chair the wom­an sat in, and the cook­ing equip­ment, and ev­ery­thing else.

Ama looked in­to the dark­ness far­ther back in the cave, her heart beat­ing fast. Sure­ly the sleep­er hadn’t wo­ken al­ready: in the dim­ness Ama could make out the shape of the sleep­ing bag, the lighter patch that was the girl’s hair, and the curve of her sleep­ing dae­mon.

She crept a lit­tle clos­er. There was no doubt about it, they had gone out and left the en­chant­ed girl alone.

A thought struck Ama like a mu­si­cal note: sup­pose she woke her be­fore the wom­an re­turned…

But she had hard­ly time to feel the thrill of that idea be­fore she heard sounds on the path out­side, and in a shiv­er of guilt she and her dae­mon dart­ed be­hind a ridge of rock at the side of the cave. She shouldn’t be here. She was spy­ing. It was wrong.

And now that gold­en mon­key was squat­ting in the en­trance, sniff­ing and turn­ing his head this way and that. Ama saw him bare his sharp teeth, and felt her own dae­mon bur­row in­to her clothes, mouse­formed and trem­bling.

“What is it?” said the wom­an’s voice, speak­ing to the mon­key, and then the cave dark­ened as her form came in­to the en­trance. “Has the girl been? Yes, there’s the food she left. She shouldn’t come in, though. We must ar­range a spot on the path for her to leave the food at.”

With­out a glance at the sleep­er, the wom­an stooped to bring the fire to life, and set a pan of wa­ter to heat while her dae­mon crouched near­by watch­ing over the path. From time to time he got up and looked around the cave, and Ama, get­ting cramped and un­com­fort­able in her nar­row hid­ing place, wished ar­dent­ly that she’d wait­ed out­side and not gone in. How long was she go­ing to be trapped?

The wom­an was mix­ing some herbs and pow­ders in­to the heat­ing wa­ter. Ama could smell the as­trin­gent fla­vors as they drift­ed out with the steam. Then came a sound from the back of the cave: the girl was mur­mur­ing and stir­ring. Ama turned her head: she could see the en­chant­ed sleep­er mov­ing, toss­ing from side to side, throw­ing an arm across her eyes. She was wak­ing!

And the wom­an took no no­tice!

She heard all right, be­cause she looked up briefly, but she soon turned back to her herbs and the boil­ing wa­ter. She poured the de­coc­tion in­to a beaker and let it stand, and on­ly then turned her full at­ten­tion to the wak­ing girl.

Ama could un­der­stand none of these words, but she heard them with in­creas­ing won­der and sus­pi­cion:

“Hush, dear,” the wom­an said. “Don’t wor­ry your­self. You’re safe.”

“Roger,” the girl mur­mured, hal­fawake. “Ser­afi­na! Where’s Roger gone… Where is he?”

“No one here but us,” her moth­er said, in a singsong voice, halfcroon­ing. “Lift your­self and let Ma­ma wash you…Up you come, my love…”

Ama watched as the girl, moan­ing, strug­gling in­to wake­ful­ness, tried to push her moth­er away; and the wom­an dipped a sponge in­to the bowl of wa­ter and mopped at her daugh­ter’s face and body be­fore pat­ting her dry.

By this time the girl was near­ly awake, and the wom­an had to move more quick­ly.

“Where’s Ser­afi­na? And Will? Help me, help me! I don’t want to sleep, No, no! I won’t! No!”

The wom­an was hold­ing the beaker in one steely­firm hand while her oth­er was try­ing to lift Lyra’s head.

“Be still, dear, be calm, hush now, drink your tea…

But the girl lashed out and near­ly spilled the drink, and cried loud­er:

“Leave me alone! I want to go! Let me go! Will, Will, help me, oh, help me…

The wom­an was grip­ping her hair tight­ly, forc­ing her head back, cram­ming the beaker against her mouth.

“I won’t! You dare touch me, and Iorek will tear your head off! Oh, Iorek, where are you? Iorek Byr­ni­son! Help me, Iorek! I won’t, I won’t…

Then, at a word from the wom­an, the gold­en mon­key sprang on Lyra’s dae­mon, grip­ping him with hard black fin­gers. The dae­mon flicked from shape to shape more quick­ly than Ama had ev­er seen a dae­mon change be­fore: cat­snaker­at­foxbird­wolfchee­tahlizard­pole­cat-

But the mon­key’s grip nev­er slack­ened; and then Pan­ta­lai­mon be­came a por­cu­pine.

The mon­key screeched and let go. Three long quills were stuck shiv­er­ing in his paw. Mrs. Coul­ter snarled and with her free hand slapped Lyra hard across the face, a vi­cious back­hand crack that threw her flat; and be­fore Lyra could gath­er her wits, the beaker was at her mouth and she had to sw­al­low or choke.

Ama wished she could shut her ears: the gulp­ing, cry­ing, cough­ing, sob­bing, plead­ing, retch­ing was al­most too much to hear. But lit­tle by lit­tle it died away, and on­ly a shaky sob or two came from the girl, who was now sink­ing once more in­to sleep, en­chant­ed sleep? Poi­soned sleep! Drugged, de­ceit­ful sleep! Ama saw a streak of white ma­te­ri­al­ize at the girl’s throat as her dae­mon ef­fort­ful­ly changed in­to a long, sin­uous, snowyfurred crea­ture with bril­liant black eyes and black­tipped tail, and laid him­self along­side her neck.

And the wom­an was singing soft­ly, croon­ing ba­by songs, smooth­ing the hair off the girl’s brow, pat­ting her hot face dry, hum­ming songs to which even Ama could tell she didn’t know the words, be­cause all she could sing was a string of non­sense syl­la­bles, lalala, baba­boo­boo, her sweet voice mouthing gib­ber­ish.

Even­tu­al­ly that stopped, and then the wom­an did a cu­ri­ous thing: she took a pair of scis­sors and trimmed the girl’s hair, hold­ing her sleep­ing head this way and that to see the best ef­fect. She took one dark blond curl and put it in a lit­tle gold lock­et she had around her own neck. Ama could tell why: she was go­ing to work some fur­ther mag­ic with it. But the wom­an held it to her lips first… Oh, this was strange.

The gold­en mon­key drew out the last of the por­cu­pine quills and said some­thing to the wom­an, who reached up to snatch a roost­ing bat from the cave ceil­ing. The lit­tle black thing flapped and squealed in a nee­dlethin voice that pierced Ama from one ear to the oth­er, and then she saw the wom­an hand the bat to her dae­mon, and she saw the dae­mon pull one of the black wings out and out and out till it snapped and broke and hung from a white string of sinew, while the dy­ing bat screamed and its fel­lows flapped around in an­guished puz­zle­ment. Crack, crack, snap, as the gold­en mon­key pulled the lit­tle thing apart limb by limb, and the wom­an lay mood­ily on her sleep­ing bag by the fire and slow­ly ate a box of choco­late.

Time passed. Light fad­ed and the moon rose, and the wom­an and her dae­mon fell asleep.

Ama, stiff and painful, crept up from her hid­ing place and tip­toed out past the sleep­ers, and didn’t make a sound till she was halfway down the path.

With fear giv­ing her speed, she ran along the nar­row trail, her dae­mon as an owl on silent wings be­side her. The clean cold air, the con­stant mo­tion of the tree­tops, the bril­liance of the moon­paint­ed clouds in the dark sky, and the mil­li­ons of stars all calmed her a lit­tle.

She stopped in sight of the lit­tle hud­dle of stone hous­es and her dae­mon perched on her fist.

“She lied!” Ama said. “She lied to us! What can we do, Ku­lang? Can we tell Da­da? What can we do?”

“Don’t tell,” said her dae­mon. “More trou­ble. We’ve got the medicine. We can wake her. We can go there when the wom­an’s away again, and wake the girl up, and take her away.”

The thought filled them both with fear. But it had been said, and the lit­tle pa­per pack­age was safe in Ama’s pock­et, and they knew how to use it.

wake up, I can’t see her, I think she’s close by, she’s hurt me…

“Oh, Lyra, don’t be fright­ened! If you’re fright­ened, too, I’ll go mad…

They tried to hold each oth­er tight, but their arms passed through the emp­ty air. Lyra tried to say what she meant, whis­per­ing close to his lit­tle pale face in the dark­ness:

“I’m just try­ing to wake up, I’m so afraid of sleep­ing all my life and then dy­ing, I want to wake up first! I wouldn’t care if it was just for an hour, as long as I was prop­er­ly alive and awake. I don’t know if this is re­al or not, even, but I will help you, Roger! I swear I will!”

“But if you’re dream­ing, Lyra, you might not be­lieve it when you wake up. That’s what I’d do, I’d just think it was on­ly a dream.”

“No!” she said fierce­ly, and





The Amber Spyglass





FIVE - THE ADAMANT TOWER


A lake of molten sul­phur ex­tend­ed the length of an im­mense canyon, re­leas­ing its mephitic va­pors in sud­den gusts and belch­es and bar­ring the way of the soli­tary winged fig­ure who stood at its edge.

If he took to the sky, the en­emy scouts who had spot­ted him, and lost him, would find him again at once; but if he stayed on the ground, it would take so long to get past this nox­ious pit that his mes­sage might ar­rive too late.

He would have to take the greater risk. He wait­ed un­til a cloud of stink­ing smoke bil­lowed off the yel­low sur­face, and dart­ed up­ward in­to the thick of it.

Four pairs of eyes in dif­fer­ent parts of the sky all saw the brief move­ment, and at once four pairs of wings beat hard against the smoke­fouled air, hurl­ing the watch­ers for­ward to the cloud.

Then be­gan a hunt in which the pur­suers couldn’t see the quar­ry and the quar­ry could see noth­ing at all. The first to break out of the cloud on the far side of the lake would have the ad­van­tage, and that might mean sur­vi­val, or it might mean a suc­cess­ful kill.

And un­luck­ily for the sin­gle fli­er, he found the clear air a few sec­onds af­ter one of his pur­suers. At once they closed with each oth­er, trail­ing streams of va­por, and dizzy, both of them, from the sick­en­ing fumes. The quar­ry had the best of it at first, but then an­oth­er hunter flew free of the cloud. In a swift and fu­ri­ous strug­gle, all three of them, twist­ing in the air like scraps of flame, rose and fell and rose again, on­ly to fall, fi­nal­ly, among the rocks on the far side. The oth­er two hunters nev­er emerged from the cloud.

At the west­ern end of a range of saw­toothed moun­tains, on a peak that com­mand­ed wide views of the plain be­low and the val­leys be­hind, a fortress of basalt seemed to grow out of the moun­tain as if some vol­cano had thrust it up a mil­li­on years ago.

In vast cav­erns be­neath the rear­ing walls, pro­vi­sions of ev­ery sort were stored and la­beled; in the ar­se­nals and mag­azines, en­gines of war were be­ing cal­ibrat­ed, armed, and test­ed; in the mills be­low the moun­tain, vol­canic fires fed mighty forges where phos­phor and ti­ta­ni­um were be­ing melt­ed and com­bined in al­loys nev­er known or used be­fore.

On the most ex­posed side of the fortress, at a point deep in the shad­ow of a but­tress where the mighty walls rose sheer out of the an­cient la­vaflows, there was a small gate, a postern where a sen­try watched day and night and chal­lenged all who sought to en­ter.

While the watch was be­ing changed on the ram­parts above, I the sen­try stamped once or twice and slapped his gloved hands on his up­per arms for warmth, for it was the cold­est hour of the night, and the lit­tle naph­tha flare in the brack­et be­side him gave no heat. His re­lief would come in an­oth­er ten min­utes, and he was look­ing for­ward to the mug of choco­late, the smoke­leaf, and most of all his bed.

To hear a ham­mer­ing at the lit­tle door was the last thing he ex­pect­ed. How­ev­er, he was alert, and he snapped open the spy hole, at the same time open­ing the tap that al­lowed a flow of naph­tha past the pi­lot light in the but­tress out­side. In the glare it threw, he saw three hood­ed fig­ures car­ry­ing be­tween them a fourth, whose shape was in­dis­tinct, and who seemed ill, or wound­ed.

The fig­ure in front threw hack his hood. He had a face the sen­try knew, but he gave the pass­word any­way and said, “We found him at the sul­phur lake. Says his name is Baruch. He’s got an ur­gent mes­sage for Lord As­riel.”

The sen­try un­barred the door, and his ter­ri­er dae­mon quiv­ered as the three fig­ures ma­neu­vered their bur­den with dif­fi­cul­ty through the nar­row en­trance. Then the dae­mon gave a soft in­vol­un­tary howl, quick­ly cut off, as the sen­try saw that the fig­ure be­ing car­ried was an an­gel, wound­ed: an an­gel of low rank and lit­tle pow­er, but an an­gel, nev­er­the­less.

“Lay him in the guard­room,” the sen­try told them, and as they did so, he turned the crank of the tele­phone bell and re­port­ed what was hap­pen­ing to the of­fi­cer of the watch.

On the high­est ram­part of the fortress was a tow­er of adamant: just one flight of steps up to a set of rooms whose win­dows looked out north, south, east, and west. The largest room was fur­nished with a ta­ble and chairs and a map chest, an­oth­er with a camp bed. A small bath­room com­plet­ed the set.

Lord As­riel sat in the adamant tow­er fac­ing his spy cap­tain across a mass of scat­tered pa­pers. A naph­tha lamp hung over the ta­ble, and a bra­zi­er held burn­ing coals against the bit­ter chill of the night. In­side the door, a small blue hawk was perch­ing on a brack­et.

The spy cap­tain was called Lord Roke. He was strik­ing to look at: he was no taller than Lord As­riel’s hand span, and as slen­der as a drag­on­fly, but the rest of Lord As­riel’s cap­tains treat­ed him with pro­found re­spect, for he was armed with a Poi­sonous sting in the spurs on his heels.

It was his cus­tom to sit on the ta­ble, and his man­ner to re­pel any­thing but the great­est cour­tesy with a haughty and malev­olent tongue. He and his kind, the Gal­livespi­ans, had few of the qual­ities of good spies ex­cept, of course, their ex­cep­tion­al small­ness: they were so proud and touchy that they would nev­er have re­mained in­con­spic­uous if they had been of Lord As­riel’s size.

“Yes,” he said, his voice clear and sharp, his eyes glit­ter­ing like droplets of ink, “your child, my Lord As­riel: I know about her. Ev­ident­ly I know more than you do.”

Lord As­riel looked at him di­rect­ly, and the lit­tle man knew at once that he’d tak­en ad­van­tage of his com­man­der’s cour­tesy: the force of Lord As­riel’s glance flicked him like a fin­ger, so that he lost his bal­an­ce and had to put out a hand to steady him­self on Lord As­riel’s wine­glass. A mo­ment lat­er Lord As­riel’s ex­pres­sion was bland and vir­tu­ous, just as his daugh­ter’s could be, and from then on Lord Roke was more care­ful.

“No doubt, Lord Roke,” said Lord As­riel. “But for rea­sons I don’t un­der­stand, the girl is the fo­cus of the Church’s at­ten­tion, and I need to know why. What are they say­ing about her?”

“The Mag­is­teri­um is alive with spec­ula­tion; one branch says one thing, an­oth­er is in­ves­ti­gat­ing some­thing else, and each of them is try­ing to keep its dis­cov­er­ies se­cret from the rest. The most ac­tive branch­es are the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline and the So­ci­ety of the Work of the Holy Spir­it, and,” said Lord Roke, “I have spies in both of them.”

“Have you turned a mem­ber of the So­ci­ety, then?” said Lord As­riel. “I con­grat­ulate you. They used to be im­preg­nable.”

“My spy in the So­ci­ety is the La­dy Salmakia,” said Lord Roke, “a very skill­ful agent. There is a priest whose dae­mon, al mouse, she ap­proached in their sleep. My agent sug­gest­ed that the man per­form a for­bid­den rit­ual de­signed to in­voke the pres­ence of Wis­dom. At the crit­ical mo­ment, the La­dy Salmakia ap­peared in front of him. The priest now thinks he can com­mu­ni­cate with Wis­dom when­ev­er he pleas­es, and that she has the form of a Gal­livespi­an and lives in his book­case.”

Lord As­riel smiled and said, “And what has she learned?” “The So­ci­ety thinks that your daugh­ter is the most im­por­tant child who has ev­er lived. They think that a great cri­sis will come be­fore very long, and that the fate of ev­ery­thing will de­pend on how she be­haves at that point. As for the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline, it’s hold­ing an in­quiry at the mo­ment, with wit­ness­es from Bolvan­gar and else­where. My spy in the Court, the Che­va­li­er Tialys, is in touch with me ev­ery day by means of the lode­stone res­ona­tor, and he is let­ting me know what they dis­cov­er. In short, I would say that the So­ci­ety of the Work of the Holy Spir­it will find out very soon where the child is, but they will do noth­ing about it. It will take the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court a lit­tle longer, but when they do, they will act de­ci­sive­ly, and at once.”

“Let me know the mo­ment you hear any more.” Lord Roke bowed and snapped his fin­gers, and the small blue hawk perch­ing on the brack­et be­side the door spread her wings and glid­ed to the ta­ble. She had a bri­dle, a sad­dle, and stir­rups. Lord Roke sprang on her back in a sec­ond, and they flew out of the win­dow, which Lord As­riel held wide for them. He left it open for a minute, in spite of the bit­ter air, and leaned on the win­dow seat, play­ing with the ears of his snowl­eop­ard dae­mon.

“She came to me on Sval­bard and I ig­nored her,” he said. “You re­mem­ber the shock… I need­ed a sac­ri­fice, and the first child to ar­rive was my own daugh­ter… But when I re­al­ized that there was an­oth­er child with her, so she was safe, I re­laxed. Was that a fa­tal mis­take? I didn’t con­sid­er her af­ter that, not for a mo­ment, but she is im­por­tant, Stel­maria!”

“Let’s think clear­ly,” his dae­mon replied. “What can she do?”

“Do, not much. Does she know some­thing?”

“She can read the alethiome­ter; she has ac­cess to knowl­edge.”

“That’s noth­ing spe­cial. So have oth­ers. And where in Hell’s name can she be?”

There was a knock at the door be­hind him, and he turned at once.

“My lord,” said the of­fi­cer who came in, “an an­gel has just ar­rived at the west­ern gate, wound­ed, he in­sists on speak­ing to you.”

And a minute lat­er, Baruch was ly­ing on the camp bed, which had been brought through to the main room. A med­ical or­der­ly had been sum­mon­ed, but it was clear that there was lit­tle hope for the an­gel: he was wound­ed sore­ly, his wings torn and his eyes dimmed.

Lord As­riel sat close by and threw a hand­ful of herbs on­to the coals in the bra­zi­er. As Will had found with the smoke of his fire, that had the ef­fect of defin­ing the an­gel’s body so he could see it more clear­ly.

“Well, sir,” he said, “what have you come to tell me?”

“Three things. Please let me say them all be­fore you speak. My name is Baruch. My com­pan­ion Balthamos and I are of the rebels’ par­ty, and so we were drawn to your stan­dard as soon as you raised it. But we want­ed to bring you some­thing valu­able, be­cause our pow­er is small, and not long ago we man­aged to find our way to the heart of the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, the Au­thor­ity’s citadel in the King­dom. And there we learned…”

He had to stop for a mo­ment to breathe in the smoke of the herbs, which seemed to steady him. He con­tin­ued:

“We learned the truth about the Au­thor­ity. We learned that he has re­tired to a cham­ber of crys­tal deep with­in the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, and that he no longer runs the dai­ly af­fairs of the King­dom. In­stead, he con­tem­plates deep­er mys­ter­ies. In his place, rul­ing on his be­half, there is an an­gel called Meta­tron. I have rea­son to know that an­gel well, though when I knew him…”

Baruch’s voice fad­ed. Lord As­riel’s eyes were blaz­ing, but he held his tongue and wait­ed for Baruch to con­tin­ue.

“Meta­tron is proud,” Baruch went on when he had re­cov­ered a lit­tle strength, “and his am­bi­tion is lim­it­less. The Au­thor­ity chose him four thou­sand years ago to be his Re­gent, and they laid their plans to­geth­er. They have a new plan, which my com­pan­ion and I were able to dis­cov­er. The Au­thor­ity con­sid­ers that con­scious be­in­gs of ev­ery kind have be­come dan­ger­ous­ly in­de­pen­dent, so Meta­tron is go­ing to in­ter­vene much more ac­tive­ly in hu­man af­fairs. They in­tend to move the Au­thor­ity se­cret­ly away from the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, to a per­ma­nent citadel some­where else, and turn the moun­tain in­to an en­gine of war. The church­es in ev­ery world are cor­rupt and weak, he thinks, they com­pro­mise too read­ily… He wants to set up a per­ma­nent in­qui­si­tion in ev­ery world, run di­rect­ly from the King­dom. And his first cam­paign will be to de­stroy your Re­pub­lic…”

They were both trem­bling, the an­gel and the man, but one from weak­ness and the oth­er from ex­cite­ment.

Baruch gath­ered his re­main­ing strength, and went on:

“The sec­ond thing is this. There is a knife that can cut open­in­gs be­tween the worlds, as well as any­thing in them. Its pow­er is un­lim­it­ed, but on­ly in the hands of the one who knows how to use it. And that per­son is a boy…”

Once again the an­gel had to stop and re­cov­er. He was fright­ened; he could feel him­self drift­ing apart. Lord As­riel could see the ef­fort he made to hold him­self to­geth­er, and sat tense­ly grip­ping the arms of his chair un­til Baruch found the strength to go on.

“My com­pan­ion is with him now. We want­ed to bring him di­rect­ly to you, but he re­fused, be­cause… This is the third thing I must tell you: he and your daugh­ter are friends. And he will not agree to come to you un­til he has found her. She is… “Who is this boy?”

“He is the son of the shaman. Of Sta­nis­laus Grum­man.” Lord As­riel was so sur­prised he stood up in­vol­un­tar­ily, send­ing bil­lows of smoke swirling around the an­gel.

“Grum­man had a son?” he said.

“Grum­man was not born in your world. Nor was his re­al name Grum­man. My com­pan­ion and I were led to him by his own de­sire to find the knife. We fol­lowed him, know­ing he would lead us to it and its bear­er, in­tend­ing to bring the bear­er to you. But the boy re­fused to…”

“‘ Once again Baruch had to stop. Lord As­riel sat down again, curs­ing his own im­pa­tience, and sprin­kled some more herbs on the fire. His dae­mon lay near­by, her tail sweep­ing slow­ly across the oak­en floor, her gold­en eyes nev­er leav­ing the an­gel’s painfilled face. Baruch took sev­er­al slow breaths, and Lord As­riel held his si­lence. The slap of the rope on the flag­pole above was the on­ly sound.

“Take your time, sir,” Lord As­riel said gen­tly. “Do you know where my daugh­ter is?”

“Hi­malaya… in her own world,” whis­pered Baruch. “Great moun­tains. A cave near a val­ley full of rain­bows…”

“A long way from here in both worlds. You flew quick­ly.”

“It is the on­ly gift I have,” said Baruch, “ex­cept the love of Balthamos, whom I shall nev­er see again.”

“And if you found her so eas­ily…

“Then any oth­er an­gel may, too.”

Lord As­riel seized a great at­las from the map chest and flung it open, look­ing for the pages that showed the Hi­malaya.

“Can you be pre­cise?” he said. “Can you show me ex­act­ly where?”

“With the knife…” Baruch tried to say, and Lord As­riel re­al­ized his mind was wan­der­ing. “With the knife he can en­ter and leave any world at will… Will is his name. But they are in dan­ger, he and Balthamos… Meta­tron knows we have his se­cret. They pur­sued us… They caught me alone on the bor­ders of your world… I was his broth­er… That was how we found our way to him in the Cloud­ed Moun­tain. Meta­tron was once Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Ma­ha­lalel… Enoch had many wives. He was a lover of the flesh… My broth­er Enoch cast me out, be­cause I… Oh, my dear Balthamos…” “Where is the girl?”

“Yes. Yes. A cave… her moth­er… val­ley full of winds and rain­bows… tat­tered flags on the shrine…” He raised him­self to look at the at­las.

Then the snowl­eop­ard dae­mon got to her feet in one swift move­ment and leapt to the door, but it was too late: the or­der­ly who had knocked had opened with­out wait­ing. That was the way things were done; it was no one’s fault; but see­ing the ex­pres­sion on the sol­di­er’s face as he looked past him, Lord As­riel turned back to see Baruch strain­ing and quiv­er­ing to hold his wound­ed form to­geth­er. The ef­fort was too much. A draft from the open door sent an ed­dy of air across the bed, and the par­ti­cles of the an­gel’s form, loos­ened by the wan­ing of his strength, swirled up­ward in­to ran­dom­ness and van­ished. “Balthamos!” came a whis­per from the air. Lord As­riel put his hand on his dae­mon’s neck; she felt him trem­ble, and stilled him. He turned to the or­der­ly. “My lord, I beg your…

“Not your fault. Take my com­pli­ments to King Ogun­we. I would be glad if he and my oth­er com­man­ders could step here at once. I would al­so like Mr. Basilides to at­tend, with the alethiome­ter. Fi­nal­ly I want No. 2 Squadron of gy­ropters armed and fu­eled, and a tanker zep­pelin to take off at once and head south­west. I shall send fur­ther or­ders in the air.”

The or­der­ly salut­ed and, with one more swift un­easy glance at the emp­ty bed, went out and shut the door.

Lord As­riel tapped the desk with a pair of brass di­viders, and crossed to open the south­ern win­dow. Far be­low, the death­less fires put out their glow and smoke on the dark­ling air, and even at this great height the clang of ham­mers could be heard in the snap­ping wind.

“Well, we’ve learned a lot, Stel­maria,” he said qui­et­ly.

“But not enough,” she replied.

There came an­oth­er knock at the door, and the alethiometrist came in. He was a pale, thin man in ear­ly mid­dle age; his name was Teukros Basilides, and his dae­mon was a night­in­gale.

“Mr. Basilides, good evening to you,” said Lord As­riel. “This is our prob­lem, and I would like you to put ev­ery­thing else aside while you deal with it…”

He told the man what Baruch had said, and showed him the at­las.

“Pin­point that cave,” he said. “Get me the co­or­di­nates as pre­cise­ly as you can. This is the most im­por­tant task you have ev­er un­der­tak­en. Be­gin at once, if you please,”

stamped her foot so hard it even hurt her in the dream. “You don’t be­lieve I’d do that, Roger, so don’t say it. I will wake up and I won’t for­get, so there.”

She looked around, but all she could see were wide eyes and hope­less faces, pale faces, dark faces, old faces, young faces, all the dead cram­ming and crowd­ing, close and silent and sor­row­ful.

Roger’s face was dif­fer­ent. His ex­pres­sion was the on­ly one that con­tained hope.

She said, “Why d’you look like that? Why en’t you mis­er­able, like them? Why en’t you at the end of your hope?”

And he said, “Be­cause





The Amber Spyglass





SIX - PREEMPTIVE ABSOLUTION


“Now, Fra Pavel,” said the In­quir­er of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline, “I want you to re­call ex­act­ly, if you can, the words you heard the witch speak on the ship.”

The twelve mem­bers of the Court looked through the dim af­ter­noon light at the cler­ic on the stand, their last wit­ness. He was a schol­ar­ly­look­ing priest whose dae­mon had the form of a frog. The Court had been hear­ing ev­idence in this case for eight days al­ready, in the an­cient high­tow­ered Col­lege of St. Jerome.

“I can­not call the witch’s words ex­act­ly to mind,” said Fra Pavel weari­ly. “I had not seen tor­ture be­fore, as I said to the Court yes­ter­day, and I found it made me feel faint and sick. So ex­act­ly what she said I can­not tell you, but I re­mem­ber the mean­ing of it. The witch said that the child Lyra had been rec­og­nized by the clans of the north as the sub­ject of a prophe­cy they had long known. She was to have the pow­er to make a fate­ful choice, on which the fu­ture of all the worlds de­pend­ed. And fur­ther­more, there was a name that would bring to mind a par­al­lel case, and which would make the Church hate and fear her.”

“And did the witch re­veal that name?”

“No. Be­fore she could ut­ter it, an­oth­er witch, who had been present un­der a spell of in­vis­ibil­ity, man­aged to kill her and es­cape.”

“So on that oc­ca­sion, the wom­an Coul­ter will not have heard the name?”

“That is so.”

“And short­ly af­ter­wards Mrs. Coul­ter left?”

“In­deed.”

“What did you dis­cov­er af­ter that?”

“I learned that the child had gone in­to that oth­er world opened by Lord As­riel, and that there she has ac­quired the help of a boy who owns, or has got the use of, a knife of ex­traor­di­nary pow­ers,” said Fra Pavel. Then he cleared his throat ner­vous­ly and went on: “I may speak en­tire­ly freely in this court?”

“With per­fect free­dom, Fra Pavel,” came the harsh, clear tones of the Pres­ident. “You will not be pun­ished for telling us what you in turn have been told. Please con­tin­ue.”

Re­as­sured, the cler­ic went on:

“The knife in the pos­ses­sion of this boy is able to make open­in­gs be­tween worlds. Fur­ther­more, it has a pow­er greater than that, please, once again, I am afraid of what I am say­ing … It is ca­pa­ble of killing the most high an­gels, and what is high­er than them. There is noth­ing this knife can­not de­stroy.”

He was sweat­ing and trem­bling, and his frog dae­mon fell from the edge of the wit­ness stand to the floor in her ag­ita­tion. Fra Pavel gasped in pain and scooped her up swift­ly, let­ting her sip at the wa­ter in the glass in front of him.

“And did you ask fur­ther about the girl?” said the In­quir­er. “Did you dis­cov­er this name the witch spoke of?”

“Yes, I did. Once again I crave the as­sur­an­ce of the court that…

“You have it,” snapped the Pres­ident. “Don’t be afraid. You are not a heretic. Re­port what you have learned, and waste no more time.”

“I beg your par­don, tru­ly. The child, then, is in the po­si­tion of Eve, the wife of Adam, the moth­er of us all, and the cause of all sin.”

The stenog­ra­phers tak­ing down ev­ery word were nuns of the or­der of St. Philomel, sworn to si­lence; but at Fra Pavel’s words there came a smoth­ered gasp from one of them, and there was a flur­ry of hands as they crossed them­selves. Fra Pavel twitched, and went on:

“Please, re­mem­ber, the alethiome­ter does not fore­cast; it says, ‘If cer­tain things come about, then the con­se­quences will be…,’ and so on. And it says that if it comes about that the child is tempt­ed, as Eve was, then she is like­ly to fall. On the out­come will de­pend… ev­ery­thing. And if this temp­ta­tion does take place, and if the child gives in, then Dust and sin will tri­umph.”

There was si­lence in the court­room. The pale sun­light that fil­tered in through the great lead­ed win­dows held in its slant­ed beams a mil­li­on gold­en motes, but these were dust, not Dust, though more than one of the mem­bers of the Court had seen in them an im­age of that oth­er in­vis­ible Dust that set­tled over ev­ery hu­man be­ing, no mat­ter how du­ti­ful­ly they kept the laws.

“Fi­nal­ly, Fra Pavel,” said the In­quir­er, “tell us what you know of the child’s present where­abouts.”

“She is in the hands of Mrs. Coul­ter,” said Fra Pavel. “And they are in the Hi­malaya. So far, that is all I have been able to tell. I shall go at once and ask for a more pre­cise lo­ca­tion, and as soon as I have it, I shall tell the Court; but…”

He stopped, shrink­ing in fear, and held the glass to his lips with a trem­bling hand.

“Yes, Fra Pavel?” said Fa­ther MacPhail. “Hold noth­ing back.”

“I be­lieve, Fa­ther Pres­ident, that the So­ci­ety of the Work of the Holy Spir­it knows more about this than I do.”

Fra Pavel’s voice was so faint it was al­most a whis­per.

“Is that so?” said the Pres­ident, his eyes seem­ing to ra­di­ate his pas­sion as they glared.

Fra Pavel’s dae­mon ut­tered a lit­tle frog whim­per. The cler­ic knew about the ri­val­ry be­tween the dif­fer­ent branch­es of the Mag­is­teri­um, and knew that to get caught in the cross fire be­tween them would be very dan­ger­ous; but to hold back what he knew would be more dan­ger­ous still.

“I be­lieve,” he went on, trem­bling, “that they are much clos­er to find­ing out ex­act­ly where the child is. They have oth­er sources of knowl­edge for­bid­den to me.”

“Quite so,” said the In­quir­er. “And did the alethiome­ter tell you about this?”

“Yes, it did.”

“Very well. Fra Pavel, you would do well to con­tin­ue that line of in­ves­ti­ga­tion. What­ev­er you need in the way of cler­ical or sec­re­tar­ial help is yours to com­mand. Please stand down.”

Fra Pavel bowed, and with his frog dae­mon on his shoul­der, he gath­ered his notes and left the court­room. The nuns flexed their fin­gers.

Fa­ther MacPhail tapped a pen­cil on the oak bench in front of him.

“Sis­ter Agnes, Sis­ter Mon­ica,” he said, “you may leave us now. Please have the tran­scrip­tion on my desk by the end of the day.”

The two nuns bowed their heads and left.

“Gen­tle­men,” said the Pres­ident, for that was the mode of ad­dress in the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, “let’s ad­journ.”

The twelve mem­bers, from the old­est (Fa­ther Makep­we, an­cient and rheumyeyed) to the youngest (Fa­ther Gomez, pale and trem­bling with zealotry), gath­ered their notes and fol­lowed the Pres­ident through to the coun­cil cham­ber, where they could face one an­oth­er across a ta­ble and talk in the ut­most pri­va­cy.

The cur­rent Pres­ident of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court was a Scot called Hugh MacPhail. He had been elect­ed young. Pres­idents served for life, and he was on­ly in his for­ties, so it was to be ex­pect­ed that Fa­ther MacPhail would mold the des­tiny of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, and thus of the whole Church, for many years to come. He was a dark­fea­tured man, tall and im­pos­ing, with a shock of wiry gray hair, and he would have been fat were it not for the bru­tal dis­ci­pline he im­posed on his body: he drank on­ly wa­ter and ate on­ly bread and fruit, and he ex­er­cised for an hour dai­ly un­der the su­per­vi­sion of a train­er of cham­pi­on ath­letes. As a re­sult, he was gaunt and lined and rest­less. His dae­mon was a lizard.

Once they were seat­ed, Fa­ther MacPhail said:

“This, then, is the state of things. There seem to be sev­er­al points to bear in mind.

“First­ly, Lord As­riel. A witch friend­ly to the Church re­ports that he is as­sem­bling a great army, in­clud­ing forces that may be an­gel­ic. His in­ten­tions, as far as the witch knows, are malev­olent to­ward the Church, and to­ward the Au­thor­ity him­self.

“Sec­ond­ly, the Obla­tion Board. Their ac­tions in set­ting up the re­search pro­gram at Bolvan­gar, and in fund­ing Mrs. Coul­ter’s ac­tiv­ities, sug­gest that they are hop­ing to re­place the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline as the most pow­er­ful and ef­fec­tive arm of the Holy Church. We have been out­paced, gen­tle­men. They have act­ed ruth­less­ly and skill­ful­ly. We should be chas­tised for our lax­ity in let­ting it hap­pen. I shall re­turn to what we might do about it short­ly.

“Third­ly, the boy in Fra Pavel’s tes­ti­mo­ny, with the knife that can do these ex­traor­di­nary things. Clear­ly we must find him and gain pos­ses­sion of it as soon as pos­si­ble.

“Fourth­ly, Dust. I have tak­en steps to find out what the Obla­tion Board has dis­cov­ered about it. One of the ex­per­imen­tal the­olo­gi­ans work­ing at Bolvan­gar has been per­suad­ed to tell us what ex­act­ly they dis­cov­ered. I shall talk to him this af­ter­noon down­stairs.”

One or two of the priests shift­ed un­com­fort­ably, for “down­stairs” meant the cel­lars be­low the build­ing: whitetiled rooms with points for an­bar­ic cur­rent, sound­proofed and welldrained.

“What­ev­er we do learn about Dust, though,” the Pres­ident went on, “we must bear our pur­pose firm­ly in mind. The Obla­tion Board sought to un­der­stand the ef­fects of Dust; we must de­stroy it al­to­geth­er. Noth­ing less than that. If in or­der to de­stroy Dust we al­so have to de­stroy the Obla­tion Board, the Col­lege of Bish­ops, ev­ery sin­gle agen­cy by which the Holy Church does the work of the Au­thor­ity, then so be it. It may be, gen­tle­men, that the Holy Church it­self was brought in­to be­ing to per­form this very task and to per­ish in the do­ing of it. But bet­ter a world with no Church and no Dust than a world where ev­ery day we have to strug­gle un­der the hideous bur­den of sin. Bet­ter a world purged of all that!”

Blaz­in­geyed, Fa­ther Gomez nod­ded pas­sion­ate­ly.

“And fi­nal­ly,” said Fa­ther MacPhail, “the child. Still just a child, I think. This Eve, who is go­ing to be tempt­ed and who, if prece­dent is any guide, will fall, and whose fall will in­volve us all in ru­in. Gen­tle­men, of all the ways of deal­ing with the prob­lem she sets us, I am go­ing to pro­pose the most rad­ical, and I have con­fi­dence in your agree­ment.

“I pro­pose to send a man to find her and kill her be­fore she can be tempt­ed.”

“Fa­ther Pres­ident,” said Fa­ther Gomez at once, “I have done pre­emp­tive penance ev­ery day of my adult life. I have stud­ied, I have trained…

The Pres­ident held up his hand. Pre­emp­tive penance and ab­so­lu­tion were doc­trines re­searched and de­vel­oped by the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, but not known to the wider Church. They in­volved do­ing penance for a sin not yet com­mit­ted, in­tense and fer­vent penance ac­com­pa­nied by scourg­ing and flag­el­la­tion, so as to build up, as it were, a store of cred­it. When the penance had reached the ap­pro­pri­ate lev­el for a par­tic­ular sin, the pen­itent was grant­ed ab­so­lu­tion in ad­vance, though he might nev­er be called on to com­mit the sin. It was some­times nec­es­sary to kill peo­ple, for ex­am­ple; and it was so much less trou­bling for the as­sas­sin if he could do so in a state of grace. “I had you in mind,” said Fa­ther MacPhail kind­ly. “I have the agree­ment of the Court? Yes. When Fa­ther Gomez leaves, with our bless­ing, he will be on his own, un­able to be reached or re­called. What­ev­er hap­pens to any­one else, he will make his way like the ar­row of God, straight to the child, and strike her down. He will be in­vis­ible; he will come in the night, like the an­gel that blast­ed the As­syr­ians; he will be silent. How much bet­ter for us all if there had been a Fa­ther Gomez in the Gar­den of Eden! We would nev­er have left par­adise.”

The young priest was near­ly weep­ing with pride. The Court gave its bless­ing.

And in the dark­est cor­ner of the ceil­ing, hid­den among the dark oak beams, sat a man no larg­er than a hand span. His heels were armed with spurs, and he heard ev­ery word they said.

In the cel­lars the man from Bolvan­gar, dressed on­ly in a dirty white shirt and loose trousers with no belt, stood un­der the bare light bulb clutch­ing the trousers with one hand and his rab­bit dae­mon with the oth­er. In front of him, in the on­ly chair, sat Fa­ther MacPhail.

“Dr. Coop­er,” the Pres­ident be­gan, “do sit down.” There was no fur­ni­ture ex­cept the chair, the wood­en bunk, and a buck­et. The Pres­ident’s voice echoed un­pleas­ant­ly off, the white tiles that lined the wall and ceil­ing.

Dr. Coop­er sat on the bunk. He could not take his eyes off the gaunt and gray­haired Pres­ident. He licked his dry lips and wait­ed to see what new dis­com­fort was com­ing.

“So you near­ly suc­ceed­ed in sev­er­ing the child from her dae­mon?” said Fa­ther MacPhail.

Dr. Coop­er said shak­ily, “We con­sid­ered that it would serve no pur­pose to wait, since the ex­per­iment was due to take place any­way, and we put the child in the ex­per­imen­tal cham­ber, but then Mrs. Coul­ter her­self in­ter­vened and took the child to her own quar­ters.”

The rab­bit dae­mon opened her round eyes and gazed fear­ful­ly at the Pres­ident, and then shut them again and hid her face.

“That must have been dis­tress­ing,” said Fa­ther MacPhail.

“The whole pro­gram was in­tense­ly dif­fi­cult,” said Dr. Coop­er, has­ten­ing to agree.

“I am sur­prised you did not seek the aid of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, where we have strong nerves.”

“We, I, we un­der­stood that the pro­gram was li­censed by… It was an Obla­tion Board mat­ter, but we were told it had the ap­proval of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline. We would nev­er have tak­en part oth­er­wise. Nev­er!”

“No, of course not. And now for an­oth­er mat­ter. Did you have any idea,” said Fa­ther MacPhail, turn­ing to the re­al sub­ject of his vis­it to the cel­lars, “of the sub­ject of Lord As­riel’s re­search­es? Of what might have been the source of the co­los­sal en­er­gy he man­aged to re­lease on Sval­bard?”

Dr. Coop­er sw­al­lowed. In the in­tense si­lence a drop of sweat fell from his chin to the con­crete floor, and both men heard it dis­tinct­ly.

“Well…” he be­gan, “there was one of our team who ob­served that in the pro­cess of sev­er­an­ce there was a re­lease of en­er­gy. Con­trol­ling it would in­volve enor­mous forces, but just as an atom­ic ex­plo­sion is det­onat­ed by con­ven­tion­al ex­plo­sives, this could be done by fo­cus­ing a pow­er­ful an­bar­ic cur­rent… How­ev­er, he wasn’t tak­en se­ri­ous­ly. I paid no at­ten­tion to his ideas,” he added earnest­ly, “know­ing that with­out au­thor­ity they might well be hereti­cal.”

“Very wise. And that col­league now? Where is he?” “He was one of those who died in the at­tack.” The Pres­ident smiled. It was so kind­ly an ex­pres­sion that Dr. Coop­er’s dae­mon shiv­ered and swooned against his breast. “Courage, Dr. Coop­er,” said Fa­ther MacPhail. “We need you to be strong and brave! There is great work to be done, a great bat­tle to be fought. You must earn the for­give­ness of the Au­thor­ity by co­op­er­at­ing ful­ly with us, by hold­ing noth­ing back, not even wild spec­ula­tion, not even gos­sip. Now I want you to de­vote all your at­ten­tion to what you re­mem­ber your col­league say­ing. Did he make any ex­per­iments? Did he leave any notes? Did he take any­one else in­to his con­fi­dence? What equip­ment was he us­ing? Think of ev­ery­thing, Dr. Coop­er. You’ll have pen and pa­per and all the time you need.

“And this room is not very com­fort­able. We’ll have you moved to some­where more suit­able. Is there any­thing you need in the way of fur­nish­ing, for ex­am­ple? Do you pre­fer to write at a ta­ble or a desk? Would you like a type­writ­ing ma­chine? Per­haps you would rather dic­tate to a stenog­ra­pher? “Let the guards know, and you shall have ev­ery­thing you need. But ev­ery mo­ment, Dr. Coop­er, I want you to think back I to your col­league and his the­ory. Your great task is to re­call, and if nec­es­sary to re­dis­cov­er, what he knew. Once you know what in­stru­ments you re­quire, you shall have those as well. It is a great task, Dr. Coop­er! You are blessed to be en­trust­ed with it! Give thanks to the Au­thor­ity.”

“I do, Fa­ther Pres­ident! I do!” Grasp­ing the loose waist­band of his trousers, the philoso­pher stood up and bowed al­most with­out re­al­iz­ing it, again and again, as the Pres­ident of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline left his cell.

That evening the Che­va­li­er Tialys, the Gal­livespi­an spy, made his way through the lanes and al­leys of Gene­va to meet his col­league, the La­dy Salmakia. It was a dan­ger­ous jour­ney for both of them: dan­ger­ous for any­one or any­thing that chal­lenged them, too, but cer­tain­ly full of per­il for the small Gal­livespi­ans. More than one prowl­ing cat had met its death at their spurs, but on­ly the week be­fore, the Che­va­li­er had near­ly lost an arm to the teeth of a mangy dog; on­ly the La­dy’s swift ac­tion had saved him.

They met at the sev­enth of their ap­point­ed meet­ing places, among the roots of a plane tree in a shab­by lit­tle square, and ex­changed their news. The La­dy Salmakia’s con­tact in the So­ci­ety had told her that ear­li­er that evening they had re­ceived a friend­ly in­vi­ta­tion from the Pres­ident of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court to come and dis­cuss mat­ters of mu­tu­al in­ter­est.

“Quick work,” said the Che­va­li­er. “A hun­dred to one he doesn’t tell them about his as­sas­sin, though.”

He told her about the plan to kill Lyra. She was not sur­prised.

“It’s the log­ical thing to do,” she said. “Very log­ical peo­ple. Tialys, do you think we shall ev­er see this child?”

“I don’t know, but I should like to. Go well, Salmakia. To­mor­row at the foun­tain.”

Un­said be­hind that brief ex­change was the one thing they nev­er spoke of: the short­ness of their lives com­pared with those of hu­mans. Gal­livespi­ans lived to nine years or ten, rarely more, and Tialys and Salmakia were both in their eighth year. They didn’t fear old age, their peo­ple died in the full strength and vig­or of their prime, sud­den­ly, and their child­hoods were very brief, but com­pared with their lives, the life of a child like Lyra would ex­tend as far in­to the fu­ture as the lives of the witch­es ex­tend­ed past Lyra’s own.

The Che­va­li­er re­turned to the Col­lege of St. Jerome and be­gan to com­pose the mes­sage he would send to Lord Roke on the lode­stone res­ona­tor.

But while Tialys was at the ren­dezvous talk­ing to Salmakia, the Pres­ident sent for Fa­ther Gomez. In his study they prayed to­geth­er for an hour, and then Fa­ther MacPhail grant­ed the young priest the pre­emp­tive ab­so­lu­tion that would make his mur­der of Lyra no mur­der at all. Fa­ther Gomez seemed trans­fig­ured; the cer­tain­ty that ran through his veins seemed to make his very eyes in­can­des­cent.

They dis­cussed prac­ti­cal ar­range­ments, mon­ey, and so forth; and then the Pres­ident said, “Once you leave here, Fa­ther Gomez, you will be com­plete­ly cut off, for­ev­er, from any help we can give. You can nev­er come back; you will nev­er hear from us. I can’t of­fer you any bet­ter ad­vice than this: don’t look for the child. That would give you away. In­stead, look for the tempter. Fol­low the tempter, and she will lead you to the child.”

“She?” said Fa­ther Gomez, shocked.

“Yes, she,” said Fa­ther MacPhail. “We have learned that much from the alethiome­ter. The world the tempter comes from is a strange one. You will see many things that will shock and star­tle you, Fa­ther Gomez. Don’t let your­self be dis­tract­ed by their odd­ness from the sa­cred task you have to do. I have faith,” he added kind­ly, “in the pow­er of your faith. This wom­an is trav­el­ing, guid­ed by the pow­ers of evil, to a place where she may, even­tu­al­ly, meet the child in time to tempt her. That is, of course, if we do not suc­ceed in re­mov­ing the girl from her present lo­ca­tion. That re­mains our first plan. You, Fa­ther Gomez, are our ul­ti­mate guar­an­tee that if that falls through, the in­fer­nal pow­ers will still not pre­vail.”

Fa­ther Gomez nod­ded. His dae­mon, a large and iri­des­cent green­backed bee­tle, clicked her wing cas­es.

The Pres­ident opened a draw­er and hand­ed the young priest a fold­ed pack­et of pa­pers.

“Here is all we know about the wom­an,” he said, “and the world she comes from, and the place she was last seen. Read it well, my dear Luis, and go with my bless­ing.”

He had nev­er used the priest’s giv­en name be­fore. Fa­ther Gomez felt tears of joy prick his eyes as he kissed the Pres­ident farewell.

you’re Lyra.”

Then she re­al­ized what that meant. She felt dizzy, even in her dream; she felt a great bur­den set­tle on her shoul­ders. And to make it even heav­ier, sleep was clos­ing in again, and Roger’s face was re­ced­ing in­to shad­ow.

“Well, I… I know… There’s all kinds of peo­ple on our side, like Dr. Mal­one.. .You know there’s an­oth­er Ox­ford, Roger, just like ours. Well, she … I found her in… She’d help … But there’s on­ly one per­son re­al­ly who…”

It was al­most im­pos­si­ble now to see the lit­tle boy, and her thoughts were spread­ing out and wan­der­ing away like sheep in a field.

“But we can trust him, Roger, I swear,” she said with a fi­nal ef­fort,





The Amber Spyglass





SEVEN - MARY MALONE


Al­most at the same time, the tempter whom Fa­ther Gomez was set­ting out to fol­low was be­ing tempt­ed her­self.

“Thank you, no, no, that’s all I need, no more, hon­est­ly, thank you,” said Dr. Mary Mal­one to the old cou­ple in the olive grove as they tried to give her more food than she could car­ry.

They lived here iso­lat­ed and child­less, and they had been afraid of the Specters they’d seen among the sil­vergray trees; but when Mary Mal­one came up the road with her ruck­sack, the Specters had tak­en fright and drift­ed away. The old cou­ple had wel­comed Mary in­to their lit­tle vi­neshel­tered farm­house, had plied her with wine and cheese and bread and olives, and now didn’t want to let her go.

“I must go on,” said Mary again, “thank you, you’ve been very kind, I can’t car­ry, oh, all right, an­oth­er lit­tle cheese, thank you…

They ev­ident­ly saw her as a tal­is­man against the Specters. She wished she could be. In her week in the world of Cit­tagazze, she had seen enough dev­as­ta­tion, enough Spectereat­en adults and wild, scav­eng­ing chil­dren, to have a hor­ror of those ethe­re­al vam­pires. All she knew was that they did drift away when she ap­proached; but she couldn’t stay with ev­ery­one who want­ed her to, be­cause she had to move on.

She found room for the last lit­tle goat’s cheese wrapped in its vine leaf, smiled and bowed again, and took a last drink from the spring that bub­bled up among the gray rocks. Then she clapped her hands gen­tly to­geth­er as the old cou­ple were do­ing, and turned firm­ly away and left.

She looked more de­ci­sive than she felt. The last com­mu­ni­ca­tion with those en­ti­ties she called shad­ow par­ti­cles, and Lyra called Dust, had been on the screen of her com­put­er, and at their in­struc­tion she had de­stroyed that. Now she was at a loss. They’d told her to go through the open­ing in the Ox­ford she had lived in, the Ox­ford of Will’s world, which she’d done, to find her­self dizzy and quak­ing with won­der in this ex­traor­di­nary oth­er world. Be­yond that, her on­ly task was to find the boy and the girl, and then play the ser­pent, what­ev­er that meant.

So she’d walked and ex­plored and in­quired, and found noth­ing. But now, she thought, as she turned up the lit­tle track away from the olive grove, she would have to look for guid­an­ce.

Once she was far enough away from the lit­tle farm­stead to be sure she wouldn’t be dis­turbed, she sat un­der the pine trees and opened her ruck­sack. At the bot­tom, wrapped in a silk scarf, was a book she’d had for twen­ty years: a com­men­tary on the Chi­nese method of div­ina­tion, the I Ching.

She had tak­en it with her for two rea­sons. One was sen­ti­men­tal: her grand­fa­ther had giv­en it to her, and she had used it a lot as a school­girl. The oth­er was that when Lyra had first found her way to Mary’s lab­ora­to­ry, she had asked: “What’s that?” and point­ed to the poster on the door that showed the sym­bols from the I Ching; and short­ly af­ter­ward, in her spec­tac­ular read­ing of the com­put­er, Lyra had learned (she claimed) that Dust had many oth­er ways of speak­ing to hu­man be­in­gs, and one of them was the method from Chi­na that used those sym­bols.

So in her swift pack­ing to leave her own world, Mary Mal­one had tak­en with her the Book of Changes, as it was called, and the lit­tle yarrow stalks with which she read it. And now the time had come to use them.

She spread the silk on the ground and be­gan the pro­cess of di­vid­ing and count­ing, di­vid­ing and count­ing and set­ting aside, which she’d done so of­ten as a pas­sion­ate, cu­ri­ous teenag­er, and hard­ly ev­er since. She had al­most for­got­ten how to do it, but she soon found the rit­ual com­ing back, and with it a sense of that calm and con­cen­trat­ed at­ten­tion that played such an im­por­tant part in talk­ing to the Shad­ows.

Even­tu­al­ly she came to the num­bers that in­di­cat­ed the hex­agram she was be­ing giv­en, the group of six bro­ken or un­bro­ken lines, and then she looked up the mean­ing. This was the dif­fi­cult part, be­cause the Book ex­pressed it­self in such an enig­mat­ic style. She read: Turn­ing to the sum­mit For pro­vi­sion of nour­ish­ment Brings goo d for­tun e. Spy­ing about with sharp eyes Like a tiger with in­sa­tiable crav­ing.

That seemed en­cour­ag­ing. She read on, fol­low­ing the com­men­tary through the mazy paths it led her on, un­til she came to: Keep­ing still is the moun­tain; it is a by­path; it means lit­tle stones, doors, and open­in­gs.

She had to guess. The men­tion of “open­in­gs” re­called the mys­te­ri­ous win­dow in the air through which she had en­tered this world; and the first words seemed to say that she should go up­ward.

Both puz­zled and en­cour­aged, she packed the book and the yarrow stalks away and set off up the path.

Four hours lat­er she was very hot and tired. The sun was low over the hori­zon. The rough track she was fol­low­ing had pe­tered out, and she was clam­ber­ing with more and more dis­com­fort among tum­bled boul­ders and small­er stones. To her left the slope fell away to­ward a land­scape of olive and lemon groves, of poor­ly tend­ed vine­yards and aban­doned wind­mills, ly­ing hazy in the evening light. To her right a scree of small rocks and grav­el sloped up to a cliff of crum­bling lime­stone.

Weari­ly she hoist­ed her ruck­sack again and set her foot on the next flat stone, but be­fore she even trans­ferred her weight, she stopped. The light was catch­ing some­thing cu­ri­ous, and she shad­ed her eyes against the glare from the scree and tried to find it again.

“And there it was: like a sheet of glass hang­ing un­sup­port­ed in the air, but glass with no at­ten­tion­catch­ing re­flec­tions in it, just a square patch of dif­fer­ence. And then she re­mem­bered what the I Ching had said: a by­path . . . lit­tle stones, doors, and open­in­gs.

It was a win­dow like the one in Sun­der­land Av­enue in Ox­ford. She could on­ly see it be­cause of the light: with the sun any high­er it prob­ably wouldn’t show up at all.

She ap­proached the lit­tle patch of air with pas­sion­ate cu­rios­ity, be­cause she hadn’t had time to look at the first one: she’d had to get away as quick­ly as pos­si­ble. But she ex­am­in­ed this one in de­tail, touch­ing the edge, mov­ing around to see how it be­came in­vis­ible from the oth­er side, not­ing the ab­so­lute dif­fer­ence be­tween this and that, and found her mind al­most burst­ing with ex­cite­ment that such things could be.

The knife bear­er who had made it, at about the time of the Amer­ican Rev­olu­tion, had been too care­less to close it, but at least he’d cut through at a point very sim­ilar to the world on this side: next to a rock face. But the rock on the oth­er side was dif­fer­ent, not lime­stone but gran­ite, and as Mary stepped through in­to the new world she found her­self not at the foot of a tow­er­ing cliff but al­most at the top of a low out­crop over­look­ing a vast plain.

It was evening here, too, and she sat down to breathe the air and rest her limbs and taste the won­der with­out rush­ing.

Wide gold­en light, and an end­less prairie or sa­van­na, like noth­ing she had ev­er seen in her own world. To be­gin with, al­though most of it was cov­ered in short grass in an in­fi­nite va­ri­ety of buff­brown­greenocheryel­low­gold­en shades, and un­du­lat­ing very gen­tly in a way that the long evening light showed up clear­ly, the prairie seemed to be laced through and through with what looked like rivers of rock with a light gray sur­face.

And sec­ond­ly, here and there on the plain were stands of the tallest trees Mary had ev­er seen. At­tend­ing a high­en­er­gy physics con­fer­ence once in Cal­ifor­nia, she had tak­en time out to look at the great red­wood trees, and mar­veled; but what­ev­er these trees were, they would have over­topped the red­woods by half again, at least. Their fo­liage was dense and dark green, their vast trunks gol­dred in the heavy evening light.

And fi­nal­ly, herds of crea­tures, too far off to see dis­tinct­ly, grazed on the prairie. There was a strangeness about their move­ment that she couldn’t quite work out.

She was des­per­ate­ly tired, and thirsty and hun­gry be­sides. Some­where near­by, though, she heard the wel­come trick­le of a spring, and on­ly a minute lat­er she found it: just a seep­age of clear wa­ter from a mossy fis­sure, and a tiny stream that led away down the slope. She drank long and grate­ful­ly, and filled her bot­tles, and then set about mak­ing her­self com­fort­able, for night was falling rapid­ly.

Propped against the rock, wrapped in her sleep­ing bag, she ate some of the rough bread and the goat’s cheese, and then fell deeply asleep.

She awoke with the ear­ly sun full in her face. The air was cool, and the dew had set­tled in tiny beads on her hair and on the sleep­ing bag. She lay for a few min­utes lapped in fresh­ness, feel­ing as if she were the first hu­man be­ing who had ev­er lived.

She sat up, yawned, stretched, shiv­ered, and washed in the chilly spring be­fore eat­ing a cou­ple of dried figs and tak­ing stock of the place.

Be­hind the lit­tle rise she had found her­self on, the land sloped grad­ual­ly down and then up again; the fullest view lay in front, across that im­mense prairie. The long shad­ows of the trees lay to­ward her now, and she could see flocks of birds wheel­ing in front of them, so small against the tow­er­ing green canopy that they looked like motes of dust.

Load­ing her ruck­sack again, she made her way down on­to the coarse, rich grass of the prairie, aim­ing for the near­est stand of trees, four or five miles away.

The grass was knee­high, and grow­ing among it were low­ly­ing bush­es, no high­er than her an­kles, of some­thing like ju­niper; and there were flow­ers like pop­pies, like but­ter­cups, like corn­flow­ers, giv­ing a haze of dif­fer­ent tints to the land­scape; and then she saw a large bee, the size of the top seg­ment of her thumb, vis­it­ing a blue flow­er head and mak­ing it bend and sway. But as it backed out of the petals and took to the air again, she saw that it was no in­sect, for a mo­ment lat­er it made for her hand and perched on her fin­ger, dip­ping a long nee­dle­like beak against her skin with the ut­most del­ica­cy and then tak­ing flight again when it found no nec­tar. It was a minute hum­ming­bird, its bronze­feath­ered wings mov­ing too fast for her to see.

How ev­ery bi­ol­ogist on earth would en­vy her if they could see what she was see­ing!

She moved on and found her­self get­ting clos­er to a herd of those graz­ing crea­tures she had seen the pre­vi­ous evening, whose move­ment had puz­zled her with­out her know­ing why. They were about the size of deer or an­telopes, and sim­ilar­ly col­ored, but what made her stop still and rub her eyes was the ar­range­ment of their legs. They grew in a di­amond for­ma­tion: two in the cen­ter, one at the front, and one un­der the tail, so that the an­imals moved with a cu­ri­ous rock­ing mo­tion. Mary longed to ex­am­ine a skele­ton and see how the struc­ture worked.

For their part, the graz­ing crea­tures re­gard­ed her with mild, in­cu­ri­ous eyes, show­ing no alarm. She would have loved to go clos­er and take time to look at them, but it was get­ting hot, and the shade of the great trees looked in­vit­ing; and there was plen­ty of time, af­ter all.

Be­fore long she found her­self step­ping out of the grass on­to one of those rivers of stone she’d seen from the hill: some­thing else to won­der at.

It might once have been some kind of la­vaflow. The un­der­ly­ing col­or was dark, al­most black, but the sur­face was paler, as if it had been ground down or worn by crush­ing. It was as smooth as a stretch of well­laid road in Mary’s own world, and cer­tain­ly eas­ier to walk on than the grass.

She fol­lowed the one she was on, which flowed in a wide curve to­ward the trees. The clos­er she got, the more as­tound­ed she was by the enor­mous size of the trunks, as wide, she es­ti­mat­ed, as the house she lived in, and as tall, as tall as… She couldn’t even make a guess.

When she came to the first trunk, she rest­ed her hands on the deeply ridged red­gold bark. The ground was cov­ered an­kledeep in brown leaf skele­tons as long as her hand, soft and fra­grant to walk on. She was soon sur­round­ed by a cloud of midge­like fly­ing things, as well as a lit­tle flock of the tiny hum­ming­birds, a yel­low but­ter­fly with a wingspread as broad as her hand, and too many crawl­ing things for com­fort. The air was full of hum­ming and buzzing and scrap­ing.

She walked along the floor of the grove feel­ing much as if she were in a cathe­dral: there was the same still­ness, the same sense of up­ward­ness in the struc­tures, the same awe with­in her­self.

It had tak­en her longer than she thought it would to walk here. It was get­ting on to­ward mid­day, for the shafts of light com­ing down through the canopy were al­most ver­ti­cal. Drowsi­ly Mary won­dered why the graz­ing crea­tures didn’t move un­der the shade of the trees dur­ing this hottest part of the day.

She soon found out.

Feel­ing too hot to move any far­ther, she lay down to rest be­tween the roots of one of the gi­ant trees, with her head on her ruck­sack, and fell in­to a doze.

Her eyes were closed for twen­ty min­utes or so, and she was not quite asleep, when sud­den­ly, from very close by, there came a re­sound­ing crash that shook the ground.

Then came an­oth­er. Alarmed, Mary sat up and gath­ered her wits, and saw a move­ment that re­solved it­self in­to a round ob­ject, about three feet across, rolling along the ground, com­ing to a halt, and falling on its side.

And then an­oth­er fell, far­ther off; she saw the mas­sive thing de­scend, and watched it crash in­to the but­tresslike root of the near­est trunk and roll away.

The thought of one of those things falling on her was enough to make her take her ruck­sack and run out of the grove al­to­geth­er. What were they? Seed­pods?

Watch­ing care­ful­ly up­ward, she ven­tured un­der the canopy again to look at the near­est of the fall­en ob­jects. She pulled it up­right and rolled it out of the grove, and then laid it on the grass to look at it more close­ly.

It was per­fect­ly cir­cu­lar and as thick as the width of her palm. There was a de­pres­sion in the cen­ter, where it had been at­tached to the tree. It wasn’t heavy, but it was im­mense­ly hard and cov­ered in fi­brous hairs, which lay along the cir­cum­fer­ence so that she could run her hand around it eas­ily one way but not the oth­er. She tried her knife on the sur­face; it made no im­pres­sion at all.

Her fin­gers seemed smoother. She smelled them; there was a faint fra­grance there, un­der the smell of dust. She looked at the seed­pod again. In the cen­ter there was a slight glis­ten­ing, and as she touched it again, she felt it slide eas­ily un­der her fin­gers. It was ex­ud­ing a kind of oil.

Mary laid the thing down and thought about the way this world had evolved.

If her guess about these uni­vers­es was right, and they were the mul­ti­ple worlds pre­dict­ed by quan­tum the­ory, then some of them would have split off from her own much ear­li­er than oth­ers. And clear­ly in this world evo­lu­tion had fa­vored enor­mous trees and large crea­tures with a di­amond­framed skele­ton.

She was be­gin­ning to see how nar­row her sci­en­tif­ic hori­zons were. No botany, no ge­ol­ogy, no bi­ol­ogy of any sort, she was as ig­no­rant as a ba­by.

And then she heard a low thun­der­like rum­ble, which was hard to lo­cate un­til she saw a cloud of dust mov­ing along one of the roads, to­ward the stand of trees, and to­ward her. It was about a mile away, but it wasn’t mov­ing slow­ly, and all of a sud­den she felt afraid.

She dart­ed back in­to the grove. She found a nar­row space be­tween two great roots and crammed her­self in­to it, peer­ing over the but­tress be­side her and out to­ward the ap­proach­ing dust cloud.

What she saw made her head spin. At first it looked like a mo­tor­cy­cle gang. Then she thought it was a herd of wheeled an­imals. But that was im­pos­si­ble. No an­imal could have wheels. She wasn’t see­ing it. But she was.

There were a dozen or so. They were rough­ly the same size as the graz­ing crea­tures, but lean­er and gray­col­ored, with horned heads and short trunks like ele­phants’. They had the same di­amond­shaped struc­ture as the graz­ers, but some­how they had evolved, on their front and rear sin­gle legs, a wheel.

But wheels did not ex­ist in na­ture, her mind in­sist­ed; they couldn’t; you need­ed an axle with a bear­ing that was com­plete­ly sep­arate from the ro­tat­ing part, it couldn’t hap­pen, it was im­pos­si­ble…

Then, as they came to a halt not fifty yards away, and the dust set­tled, she sud­den­ly made the con­nec­tion, and she couldn’t help laugh­ing out loud with a lit­tle cough of de­light.

The wheels were seed­pods. Per­fect­ly round, im­mense­ly hard and light, they couldn’t have been de­signed bet­ter. The crea­tures hooked a claw through the cen­ter of the pods with their front and rear legs, and used their two lat­er­al legs to push against the ground and move along. While she mar­veled at this, she was al­so a lit­tle anx­ious, for their horns looked formidably sharp, and even at this dis­tance she could see in­tel­li­gence and cu­rios­ity in their gaze.

And they were look­ing for her.

One of them had spot­ted the seed­pod she had tak­en out of the grove, and he trun­dled off the road to­ward it. When he reached it, he lift­ed it on­to an edge with his trunk and rolled it over to his com­pan­ions.

They gath­ered around the pod and touched it del­icate­ly with those pow­er­ful, flex­ible trunks, and she found her­self in­ter­pret­ing the soft chirrups and clicks and hoots they were mak­ing as ex­pres­sions of dis­ap­proval. Some­one had tam­pered with this: it was wrong.

Then she thought: I came here for a pur­pose, al­though I don’t un­der­stand it yet. Be bold. Take the ini­tia­tive. So she stood up and very self­con­scious­ly called:

“Over here. This is where I am. I looked at your seed­pod. I’m sor­ry. Please don’t harm me.”

In­stant­ly their heads snapped around, trunks held out, glit­ter­ing eyes fac­ing for­ward. Their ears had all flicked up­right.

She stepped out of the shel­ter of the roots and faced them di­rect­ly. She held out her hands, re­al­iz­ing that such a ges­ture might mean noth­ing to crea­tures with no hands them­selves. Still, it was all she could do. Pick­ing up her ruck­sack, she walked across the grass and stepped on­to the road.

Close up, not five steps away, she could see much more about their ap­pear­an­ce, but her at­ten­tion was held by some­thing live­ly and aware in their gaze, by an in­tel­li­gence. These crea­tures were as dif­fer­ent from the graz­ing an­imals near­by as a hu­man was from a cow.

Mary point­ed to her­self and said, “Mary.”

The near­est crea­ture reached for­ward with its trunk. She moved clos­er, and it touched her on the breast, where she had point­ed, and she heard her voice com­ing back to her from the crea­ture’s throat: “Mer­ry.”

“What are you?” she said.

“Watahyu?” the crea­ture re­spond­ed.

All she could do was re­spond. “I am a hu­man,” she said.

“Aya­ma yu­man,” said the crea­ture, and then some­thing even odd­er hap­pened: the crea­tures laughed.

Their eyes wrin­kled, their trunks waved, they tossed their heads, and from their throats came the un­mis­tak­able sound of mer­ri­ment. She couldn’t help it: she laughed, too.

Then an­oth­er crea­ture moved for­ward and touched her hand with its trunk. Mary of­fered her oth­er hand as well to its soft, bris­tled, quest­ing touch.

“Ah,” she said, “you’re smelling the oil from the seed­pod…”

“Seepot,” said the crea­ture.

“If you can make the sounds of my lan­guage, we might be able to com­mu­ni­cate, one day. God knows how. Mary,” she said, point­ing to her­self again.

Noth­ing. They watched. She did it again: “Mary.”

The near­est crea­ture touched its own breast with its trunk and spoke. Was it three syl­la­bles, or two? The crea­ture spoke again, and this time Mary tried hard to make the same sounds: “Mule­fa,” she said ten­ta­tive­ly.

Oth­ers re­peat­ed, “Mule­fa” in her voice, laugh­ing, and even seemed to be teas­ing the crea­ture who had spo­ken. “Mule­fa!” they said again, as if it were a fine joke.

“Well, if you can laugh, I don’t sup­pose you’ll eat me,” Mary said. And from that mo­ment, there was an ease and friend­li­ness be­tween her and them, and she felt ner­vous no more.

And the group it­self re­laxed: they had things to do, they weren’t roam­ing at ran­dom. Mary saw that one of them had a sad­dle or pack on its back, and two oth­ers lift­ed the seed­pod on­to it, mak­ing it se­cure by ty­ing straps around it, with deft and in­tri­cate move­ments of their trunks. When they stood still, they bal­an­ced with their lat­er­al legs, and when they moved, they turned both front and back legs to steer. Their move­ments were full of grace and pow­er.

One of them wheeled to the edge of the road and raised its trunk to ut­ter a trum­pet­ing call. The herd of graz­ers all looked up as one and be­gan to trot to­ward them. When they ar­rived, they stood pa­tient­ly at the verge and let the wheeled crea­tures move slow­ly through them, check­ing, touch­ing, count­ing.

Then Mary saw one reach be­neath a graz­er and milk it with her trunk; and then the wheeled one rolled over to her and raised her trunk del­icate­ly to Mary’s mouth.

At first she flinched, but there was an ex­pec­ta­tion in the crea­ture’s eye, so she came for­ward again and opened her lips.

The crea­ture ex­pressed a lit­tle of the sweet, thin milk in­to her mouth, watched her sw­al­low, and gave her some more, again and again. The ges­ture was so clever and kind­ly that Mary im­pul­sive­ly put her arms around the crea­ture’s head and kissed her, smelling the hot, dusty hide and feel­ing the hard bones un­der­neath and the mus­cu­lar pow­er of the trunk.

Present­ly the lead­er trum­pet­ed soft­ly and the graz­ers moved away. The mule­fa were prepar­ing to leave. She felt joy that they had wel­comed her, and sad­ness that they were leav­ing; but then she felt sur­prise as well.

One of the crea­tures was low­er­ing it­self, kneel­ing down on the road, and ges­tur­ing with its trunk, and the oth­ers were beck­on­ing and in­vit­ing her…No doubt about it: they were of­fer­ing to car­ry her, to take her with them.

An­oth­er took her ruck­sack and fas­tened it to the sad­dle of a third, and awk­ward­ly Mary climbed on the back of the kneel­ing one, won­der­ing where to put her legs, in front of the crea­ture’s, or be­hind? And what could she hold on to?

But be­fore she could work it out, the crea­ture had risen, and the group be­gan to move away along the high­way, with Mary rid­ing among them.

be­cause he’s Will.”





The Amber Spyglass





EIGHT - VODKA


Balthamos felt the death of Baruch the mo­ment it hap­pened. He cried aloud and soared in­to the night air over the tun­dra, flail­ing his wings and sob­bing his an­guish in­to the clouds; and it was some time be­fore he could com­pose him­self and go back to Will, who was wide awake, knife in hand, peer­ing up in­to the damp and chilly murk. They were back in Lyra’s world.

“What is it?” said Will as the an­gel ap­peared trem­bling be­side him. “Is it dan­ger? Get be­hind me…

“Baruch is dead,” cried Balthamos, “my dear Baruch is dead…

“When? Where?”

But Balthamos couldn’t tell; he on­ly knew that half his heart had been ex­tin­guished. He couldn’t keep still: he flew up again, scour­ing the sky as if to seek out Baruch in this cloud or that, call­ing, cry­ing, call­ing; and then he’d be over­come with guilt, and fly down to urge Will to hide and keep qui­et, and promise to watch over him tire­less­ly; and then the pres­sure of his grief would crush him to the ground, and he’d re­mem­ber ev­ery in­stance of kind­ness and courage that Baruch had ev­er shown, and there were thou­sands, and he’d for­got­ten none of them; and he’d cry that a na­ture so gra­cious could nev­er be snuffed out, and he’d soar in­to the skies again, cast­ing about in ev­ery di­rec­tion, reck­less and wild and strick­en, curs­ing the very air, the clouds, the stars.

Fi­nal­ly Will said, “Balthamos, come here.”

The an­gel came at his com­mand, help­less. Shiv­er­ing in­side his cloak, in the hit­ter cold gloom of the tun­dra, the boy said to him, “You must try to keep qui­et now. You know there are things out there that’ll at­tack if they hear a noise. I can pro­tect you with the knife if you’re near­by, but if they at­tack you up there, I won’t be able to help. And if you die, too, that’ll be the end for me. Balthamos, I need you to help guide me to Lyra. Please don’t for­get that. Baruch was strong, be strong, too. Be like him for me.”

At first Balthamos didn’t speak, but then he said, “Yes. Yes, of course I must. Sleep now, Will, and I shall stand guard, I shan’t fail you.”

Will trust­ed him; he had to. And present­ly he fell asleep again.

When he woke up, soaked with dew and cold to his bones, the an­gel was stand­ing near­by. The sun was just ris­ing, and the reeds and the marsh plants were all tipped with gold.

Be­fore Will could move, Balthamos said, “I’ve de­cid­ed what I must do. I shall stay with you day and night, and do it cheer­ful­ly and will­ing­ly, for the sake of Baruch. I shall guide you to Lyra, if I can, and then I shall guide you both to Lord As­riel. I have lived thou­sands of years, and un­less I am killed, I shall live many thou­sands of years more; but I nev­er met a na­ture that made me so ar­dent to do good, or to be kind, as Baruch’s did. I failed so many times, but each time his good­ness was there to re­deem me. Now it’s not, I shall have to try with­out it. Per­haps I shall fail from time to time, but I shall try all the same.”

“Then Baruch would be proud of you,” said Will, shiv­er­ing.

“Shall I fly ahead now and see where we are?”

“Yes,” said Will, “fly high, and tell me what the land’s like far­ther on. Walk­ing on this marsh­land is go­ing to take for­ev­er.”

Balthamos took to the air. He hadn’t told Will ev­ery­thing he was anx­ious about, be­cause he was try­ing to do his best and not wor­ry him; but he knew that the an­gel Meta­tron, the Re­gent, from whom they’d es­caped so nar­row­ly, would have Will’s face firm­ly im­print­ed on his mind. And not on­ly his face, but ev­ery­thing about him that an­gels were able to see, in­clud­ing parts of which Will him­self was not aware, such as that as­pect of his na­ture Lyra would have called his dae­mon. Will was in great dan­ger from Meta­tron now, and at some time Balthamos would have to tell him; but not quite yet. It was too dif­fi­cult.

Will, reck­on­ing that it would be quick­er to get warm by walk­ing than by gath­er­ing fu­el and wait­ing for a fire to catch, sim­ply slung the ruck­sack over his shoul­ders, wrapped the cloak around ev­ery­thing, and set off to­ward the south. There was a path, mud­dy and rut­ted and pot­holed, so peo­ple did some­times come this way; but the flat hori­zon was so far away on ev­ery side that he had lit­tle sense of mak­ing progress.

Some­time lat­er, when the light was brighter, Balthamos’s voice spoke be­side him.

“About half a day’s walk ahead, there is a wide riv­er and a town, where there’s a wharf for boats to tie up. I flew high enough to see that the riv­er goes a long way di­rect­ly south and north. If you could get a pas­sage, then you could move much more quick­ly.”

“Good,” said Will fer­vent­ly. “And does this path go to the town?”

“It goes through a vil­lage, with a church and farms and or­chards, and then on to the town.”

“I won­der what lan­guage they speak. I hope they don’t lock me up if I can’t speak theirs.”

“As your dae­mon,” said Balthamos, “I shall trans­late for you. I have learned many hu­man lan­guages; I can cer­tain­ly un­der­stand the one they speak in this coun­try.”

Will walked on. The toil was dull and me­chan­ical, but at least he was mov­ing, and at least ev­ery step took him clos­er to Lyra.

The vil­lage was a shab­by place: a hud­dle of wood­en build­in­gs, with pad­docks con­tain­ing rein­deer, and dogs that barked as he ap­proached. Smoke crept out of the tin chim­neys and hung low over the shin­gled roofs. The ground was heavy and dragged at his feet, and there had ob­vi­ous­ly been a re­cent flood: walls were marked with mud to halfway up the doors, and bro­ken beams of wood and loose­hang­ing sheets of cor­ru­gat­ed iron showed where sheds and ve­ran­das and out­build­in­gs had been swept away.

But that was not the most cu­ri­ous fea­ture of the place. At first he thought he was los­ing his bal­an­ce, it even made him stum­ble once or twice, for the build­in­gs were two or three de­grees out of the ver­ti­cal, all lean­ing the same way. The dome of the lit­tle church had cracked bad­ly. Had there been an earth­quake?

Dogs were bark­ing with hys­ter­ical fury, but not dar­ing to come close. Balthamos, be­ing a dae­mon, had tak­en the form of a large snow white dog with black eyes, thick fur, and tightcurled tail, and he snarled so fierce­ly that the re­al dogs kept their dis­tance. They were thin and mangy, and the few rein­deer Will could see were scab­by­coat­ed and list­less.

Will paused in the cen­ter of the lit­tle vil­lage and looked around, won­der­ing where to go, and as he stood there, two or three men ap­peared ahead and stood star­ing at him. They were the first peo­ple he had ev­er seen in Lyra’s world. They wore heavy felt coats, mud­dy boots, and fur hats, and they didn’t look friend­ly.

The white dog changed in­to a spar­row and flew to Will’s shoul­der. No one blinked an eye at this: each of the men had a dae­mon, Will saw, dogs, most of them, and that was how things hap­pened in this world. On his shoul­der, Balthamos whis­pered: “Keep mov­ing. Don’t look them in the eye. Keep your head down. That is the re­spect­ful thing to do.”

Will kept walk­ing. He could make him­self in­con­spic­uous; it was his great­est tal­ent. By the time he got to them, the men had al­ready lost in­ter­est in him. But then a door opened in the biggest house in the road, and a voice called some­thing loud­ly.

Balthamos said soft­ly, “The priest. You will have to be po­lite to him. Turn and bow.”

Will did so. The priest was an im­mense, gray­beard­ed man, wear­ing a black cas­sock, with a crow dae­mon on his shoul­der. His rest­less eyes moved over Will’s face and body, tak­ing ev­ery­thing in. He beck­oned.

Will went to the door­way and bowed again.

The priest said some­thing, and Balthamos mur­mured, “He’s ask­ing where you come from. Say what­ev­er you like.”

“I speak En­glish,” Will said slow­ly and clear­ly. “I don’t know any oth­er lan­guages.”

“Ah, En­glish!” cried the priest glee­ful­ly in En­glish. “My dear young man! Wel­come to our vil­lage, our lit­tle no­longer­per­pen­dic­ular Kholod­noye! What is your name, and where are you go­ing?”

“My name is Will, and I’m go­ing south. I have lost my fam­ily, and I’m try­ing to find them again.”

“Then you must come in­side and have some re­fresh­ment,” said the priest, and put a heavy arm around Will’s shoul­ders, pulling him in through the door­way.

The man’s crow dae­mon was show­ing a vivid in­ter­est in Balthamos. But the an­gel was equal to that: he be­came a mouse and crept in­to Will’s shirt as if he were shy.

The priest led him in­to a par­lor heavy with to­bac­co smoke, where a ca­st­iron samovar steamed qui­et­ly on a side ta­ble.

“What was your name?” said the priest. “Tell me again.”

“Will Par­ry. But I don’t know what to call you.”

“Otyets Se­my­on,” said the priest, stroking Will’s arm as he guid­ed him to a chair. “Otyets means Fa­ther. I am a priest of the Holy Church. My giv­en name is Se­my­on, and the name of my fa­ther was Boris, so I am Se­my­on Boriso­vitch. What is your fa­ther’s name?”

“John Par­ry.”

“John is Ivan. So you are Will Ivanovitch, and I am Fa­ther Se­my­on Boriso­vitch. Where have you come from, Will Ivanovitch, and where are you go­ing?”

“I’m lost,” Will said. “I was trav­el­ing with my fam­ily to the south. My fa­ther is a sol­di­er, but he was ex­plor­ing in the Arc­tic, and then some­thing hap­pened and we got lost. So I’m trav­el­ing south be­cause I know that’s where we were go­ing next.”

The priest spread his hands and said, “A sol­di­er? An ex­plor­er from Eng­land? No one so in­ter­est­ing as that has trod­den the dirty roads of Kholod­noye for cen­turies, but in this time of up­heaval, how can we know that he will not ap­pear to­mor­row? You your­self are a wel­come vis­itor, Will Ivanovitch. You must stay the night in my house and we will talk and eat to­geth­er. Ly­dia Alex­an­drov­na!” he called.

An el­der­ly wom­an came in silent­ly. He spoke to her in Rus­sian, and she nod­ded and took a glass and filled it with hot tea from the samovar. She brought the glass of tea to Will, to­geth­er with a lit­tle saucer of jam with a sil­ver spoon.

“Thank you,” said Will.

“The con­serve is to sweet­en the tea,” said the priest. “Ly­dia Alex­an­drov­na made it from bil­ber­ries.”

The re­sult was that the tea was sick­ly as well as bit­ter, but Will sipped it, nonethe­less. The priest kept lean­ing for­ward to look close­ly at him, and felt his hands to see whether he was cold, and stroked his knee. In or­der to dis­tract him, Will asked why the build­in­gs in the vil­lage sloped.

“There has been a con­vul­sion in the earth,” the priest said. “It is all fore­told in the Apoc­alypse of St. John. Rivers flow back­ward… The great riv­er on­ly a short way from here used to flow north in­to the Arc­tic Ocean. All the way from the moun­tains of cen­tral Asia it flowed north for thou­sands and thou­sands of years, ev­er since the Au­thor­ity of God the Almighty Fa­ther cre­at­ed the earth. But when the earth shook and the fog and the floods came, ev­ery­thing changed, and then the great riv­er flowed south for a week or more be­fore it turned again and went north. The world is turned up­side down. Where were you when the great con­vul­sion came?”

“A long way from here,” Will said. “I didn’t know what was hap­pen­ing. When the fog cleared, I had lost my fam­ily and I don’t know where I am now. You’ve told me the name of this place, but where is it? Where are we?”

“Bring me that large book on the bot­tom shelf,” said Se­my­on Boriso­vitch. “I will show you.”

The priest drew his chair up to the ta­ble and licked his fin­gers be­fore turn­ing the pages of the great at­las.

“Here,” he said, point­ing with a dirty fin­ger­nail at a spot in cen­tral Siberia, a long way east of the Urals. The riv­er near­by flowed, as the priest had said, from the north­ern part of the moun­tains in Ti­bet all the way to the Arc­tic. He looked close­ly at the Hi­malaya, but he could see noth­ing like the map Baruch had sketched.

Se­my­on Boriso­vitch talked and talked, press­ing Will for de­tails of his life, his fam­ily, his home, and Will, a prac­ticed dis­sem­bler, an­swered him ful­ly enough. Present­ly the house­keep­er brought in some beet­root soup and dark bread, and af­ter the priest had said a long grace, they ate.

“Well, how shall we pass our day, Will Ivanovitch?” said Se­my­on Boriso­vitch. “Shall we play at cards, or would you pre­fer to talk?”

He drew an­oth­er glass of tea from the samovar, and Will took it doubt­ful­ly.

“I can’t play cards,” he said, “and I’m anx­ious to get on and keep trav­el­ing. If I went to the riv­er, for ex­am­ple, do you think I could find a pas­sage on a steam­er go­ing south?”

The priest’s huge face dark­ened, and he crossed him­self with a del­icate flick of the wrist.

“There is trou­ble in the town,” he said. “Ly­dia Alex­an­drov­na has a sis­ter who came here and told her there is a boat car­ry­ing bears up the riv­er. Ar­mored bears. They come from the Arc­tic. You did not see ar­mored bears when you were in the north?”

The priest was sus­pi­cious, and Balthamos whis­pered so qui­et­ly that on­ly Will could hear: “Be care­ful.” And Will knew at once why he’d said it: his heart had be­gun to pound when Se­my­on Boriso­vitch men­tioned the bears, be­cause of what Lyra had told him about them. He must try to con­tain his feel­in­gs.

He said, “We were a long way from Sval­bard, and the bears were oc­cu­pied with their own af­fairs.”

“Yes, that is what I heard,” said the priest, to Will’s re­lief, “But now they are leav­ing their home­land and com­ing south. They have a boat, and the peo­ple of the town will not let them re­fu­el. They are afraid of the bears. And so they should be, they are chil­dren of the dev­il. All things from the north are dev­il­ish. Like the witch­es, daugh­ters of evil! The Church should have put them all to death many years ago. Witch­es, have noth­ing to do with them, Will Ivanovitch, you hear me? You know what they will do when you come to the right age? They will try to se­duce you. They will use all the soft, cun­ning, de­ceit­ful ways they have, their flesh, their soft skin, their sweet voic­es, and they will take your seed, you know what I mean by that, they will drain you and leave you hol­low! They will take your fu­ture, your chil­dren that are to come, and leave you noth­ing. They should be put to death, ev­ery one.”

The priest reached across to the shelf be­side his chair and took down a bot­tle and two small glass­es.

“Now I am go­ing to of­fer you a lit­tle drink, Will Ivanovitch,” he said. “You are young, so not very many glass­es. But you are grow­ing, and so you need to know some things, like the taste of vod­ka. Ly­dia Alex­an­drov­na col­lect­ed the berries last year, and I dis­tilled the liquor, and here in the bot­tle is the re­sult, the on­ly place where Otyets Se­my­on Boriso­vitch and Ly­dia Alex­an­drov­na lie to­geth­er!”

He laughed and un­corked the bot­tle, fill­ing each glass to the rim. This kind of talk made Will hideous­ly un­easy. What should he do? How could he refuse to drink with­out dis­cour­tesy?

“Otyets Se­my­on,” he said, stand­ing, “you have been very kind, and I wish I could stay longer to taste your drink and to hear you talk, be­cause what you tell me has been very in­ter­est­ing. But you un­der­stand I am un­hap­py about my fam­ily, and very anx­ious to find them again, so I think I must move on, much as I would like to stay.”

The priest pushed out his lips, in the thick­et of his beard, and frowned; but then he shrugged and said, “Well, you shall go if you must. But be­fore you leave, you must drink your vod­ka. Stand with me now! Take it, and down all in one, like this!”

He threw back the glass, sw­al­low­ing it all at once, and then hauled his mas­sive body up and stood very close to Will. In his fat, dirty fin­gers the glass he held out seemed tiny; but it was brim­ming with the clear spir­it, and Will could smell the heady tang of the drink and the stale sweat and the food stains on the man’s cas­sock, and he felt sick be­fore he be­gan.

“Drink, Will Ivanovitch!” the priest cried, with a threat­en­ing hearti­ness.

Will lift­ed the glass and un­hesi­tat­ing­ly sw­al­lowed the fiery, oily liq­uid in one gulp. Now he would have to fight hard to avoid be­ing sick.

There was one more or­deal to come. Se­my­on Boriso­vitch leaned for­ward from his great height, and took Will by both shoul­ders.

“My boy,” he said, and then closed his eyes and be­gan to in­tone a prayer or a psalm. Va­pors of to­bac­co and al­co­hol and sweat came pow­er­ful­ly from him, and he was close enough for his thick beard, wag­ging up and down, to brush Will’s face. Will held his breath.

The priest’s hands moved be­hind Will’s shoul­ders, and then Se­my­on Boriso­vitch was hug­ging him tight­ly and kiss­ing his cheeks, right, left, right again. Will felt Balthamos dig tiny claws in­to his shoul­der, and kept still. His head was swim­ming, his stom­ach lurch­ing, but he didn’t move.

Fi­nal­ly it was over, and the priest stepped back and pushed him away.

“Go, then,” he said, “go south, Will Ivanovitch. Go.”

Will gath­ered his cloak and the ruck­sack, and tried to walk straight as he left the priest’s house and took the road out of the vil­lage.

He walked for two hours, feel­ing the nau­sea grad­ual­ly sub­side and a slow, pound­ing headache take its place. Balthamos made him stop at one point, and laid his cool hands on Will’s neck and fore­head, and the ache eased a lit­tle; but Will made him­self a promise that he would nev­er drink vod­ka again.

And in the late af­ter­noon the path widened and came out of the reeds, and Will saw the town ahead of him, and be­yond it an ex­panse of wa­ter so broad it might have been a sea.

Even from some way off, Will could see that there was trou­ble. Puffs of smoke were erupt­ing from be­yond the roofs, fol­lowed a few sec­onds lat­er by the boom of a gun.

“Balthamos,” he said, “you’ll have to be a dae­mon again. Just keep near me and watch out for dan­ger.”

He walked in­to the out­skirts of the scruffy lit­tle town, where the build­in­gs leaned even more per­ilous­ly than the vil­lage, and where the flood­ing had left its mud stains on the walls high above Will’s head. The edge of the town was de­sert­ed, but as he made his way to­ward the riv­er, the noise of shout­ing, of screams, and of the crack­le of ri­fle fire got loud­er.

And here at last there were peo­ple: some watch­ing from up­per­floor win­dows, some cran­ing anx­ious­ly around the cor­ners of build­in­gs to look ahead at the wa­ter­front, where the met­al fin­gers of cranes and der­ricks and the masts of big ves­sels rose above the rooftops.

An ex­plo­sion shook the walls, and glass fell out of a near­by win­dow. Peo­ple drew back and then peered around again, and more cries rose in­to the smoky air.

Will reached the cor­ner of the street and looked along the wa­ter­front. When the smoke and dust cleared a lit­tle, he saw one rust­ing ves­sel stand­ing off­shore, keep­ing its place against the flow of the riv­er, and on the wharf a mob of peo­ple armed with ri­fles or pis­tols sur­round­ing a great gun, which, as he watched, boomed again. A flash of fire, a lurch­ing re­coil, and near the ves­sel, a mighty splash.

Will shad­ed his eyes. There were fig­ures in the boat, but, he rubbed his eyes, even though he knew what to ex­pect, they weren’t hu­man. They were huge be­in­gs of met­al, or crea­tures in heavy ar­mor, and on the fore­deck of the ves­sel, a bright flow­er of flame sud­den­ly bloomed, and the peo­ple cried out in alarm. The flame sped in­to the air, ris­ing high­er and com­ing clos­er and shed­ding sparks and smoke, and then fell with a great splash of fire near the gun. Men cried and scat­tered, and some ran in flames to the wa­ter’s edge and plunged in, to be swept along and out of sight in the cur­rent.

Will found a man close by who looked like a teach­er, and said:

“Do you speak En­glish?”

“Yes, yes, in­deed…

“What is hap­pen­ing?”

“The bears, they are at­tack­ing, and we try to fight them, but it is dif­fi­cult, we have on­ly one gun, and…

The fire throw­er on the boat hurled an­oth­er gout of blaz­ing pitch, and this time it land­ed even clos­er to the gun. Three big ex­plo­sions al­most im­me­di­ate­ly af­ter­ward showed that it had found the am­mu­ni­tion, and the gun­ners leapt away, let­ting the bar­rel swing down low.

“Ah,” the man lament­ed, “it’s no good, they can’t fire…

The com­man­der of the boat brought the ves­sel’s head around and moved in to­ward the shore. Many peo­ple cried out in alarm and de­spair, es­pe­cial­ly when an­oth­er great bulb of flame burst in­to be­ing on the fore­deck, and some of those with ri­fles fired a shot or two and turned to flee; but this time the bears didn’t launch the fire, and soon the ves­sel moved broad­side on to­ward the wharf, en­gine beat­ing hard to hold it against the cur­rent.

Two sailors (hu­man, not bears) leapt down to throw ropes around the bol­lards, and a great hiss and cry of anger rose from the towns­folk at these hu­man traitors. The sailors took no no­tice, but ran to low­er a gang­plank.

Then as they turned to go back on board, a shot was fired from some­where near Will, and one of the sailors fell. His dae­mon, a seag­ull, van­ished as if she’d been pinched out of ex­is­tence like a can­dle flame.

The re­ac­tion from the bears was pure fury. At once the fire throw­er was re­lit and hauled around to face the shore, and the mass of flame shot up­ward and then cas­cad­ed in a hun­dred spilling gouts over the rooftops. And at the top of the gang­way ap­peared a hear larg­er than any of the oth­ers, an ap­pari­tion of iron­clad might, and the bul­lets that rained on him whined and clanged and thud­ded use­less­ly, un­able to make the slight­est dent in his mas­sive ar­mor.

Will said to the man be­side him, “Why are they at­tack­ing the town?”

“They want fu­el. But we have no deal­in­gs with bears. Now they are leav­ing their king­dom and sail­ing up the riv­er, who knows what they will do? So we must fight them. Pi­rates, rob­bers…

The great bear had come down the gang­way, and massed be­hind him were sev­er­al oth­ers, so heavy that the ship list­ed; and Will saw that the men on the wharf had gone back to the gun and were load­ing a shell in­to the breech.

An idea came, and he ran out on­to the quay­side, right in­to the emp­ty space be­tween the gun­ners and the bear.

“Stop!” he shout­ed. “Stop fight­ing. Let me speak to the bear!”

There was a sud­den lull, and ev­ery­one stood still, as­ton­ished at this crazy be­hav­ior. The bear him­self, who had been gath­er­ing his strength to charge the gun­ners, stayed where he was, but ev­ery line of his body trem­bled with fe­roc­ity. His great claws dug in­to the ground, and his black eyes glowed with rage un­der the iron hel­met.

“What are you? What do you want?” he roared in En­glish, since Will had spo­ken in that lan­guage.

The peo­ple watch­ing looked at one an­oth­er in be­wil­der­ment, and those who could un­der­stand trans­lat­ed for the oth­ers.

“I’ll fight you, in sin­gle com­bat,” cried Will, “and if you give way, then the fight­ing has to stop.”

The bear didn’t move. As for the peo­ple, as soon as they un­der­stood what Will was say­ing, they shout­ed and jeered and hoot­ed with mock­ing laugh­ter. But not for long, be­cause Will turned to face the crowd, and stood cold­eyed, con­tained, and per­fect­ly still, un­til the laugh­ter stopped. He could feel the black­bird­Balthamos trem­bling on his shoul­der.

When the peo­ple were silent, he called out, “If I make the bear give way, you must agree to sell them fu­el. Then they’ll go on along the riv­er and leave you alone. You must agree. If you don’t, they’ll de­stroy all of you.”

He knew that the huge bear was on­ly a few yards be­hind him, but he didn’t turn; he watched the towns­peo­ple talk­ing, ges­tic­ulat­ing, ar­gu­ing, and af­ter a minute, a voice called, “Boy! Make the bear agree!”

Will turned back. He sw­al­lowed hard and took a deep breath and called:

“Bear! You must agree. If you give way to me, the fight­ing has to stop, and you can buy fu­el and go peace­ful­ly up the riv­er.”

“Im­pos­si­ble,” roared the bear. “It would be shame­ful to fight you. You are as weak as an oys­ter out of its shell. I can­not fight you.”

“I agree,” said Will, and ev­ery scrap of his at­ten­tion was now fo­cused on this great fe­ro­cious be­ing in front of him. “It’s not a fair con­test at all. You have all that ar­mor, and I have none. You could take off my head with one sweep of your paw. Make it fair­er, then. Give me one piece of your ar­mor, any one you like. Your hel­met, for ex­am­ple. Then we’ll be bet­ter matched, and it’ll be no shame to fight me.”

With a snarl that ex­pressed ha­tred, rage, and scorn, the bear reached up with a great claw and un­hooked the chain that held his hel­met in place.

And now there was a deep hush over the whole wa­ter­front. No one spoke, no one moved. They could tell that some­thing was hap­pen­ing such as they’d nev­er seen be­fore, and they couldn’t tell what it was. The on­ly sound now was the splash­ing of the riv­er against the wood­en pil­in­gs, the beat of the ship’s en­gine, and the rest­less cry­ing of seag­ulls over­head; and then the great clang as the hear hurled his hel­met down at Will’s feet.

Will put his ruck­sack down and hoist­ed the hel­met up on its end. He could bare­ly lift it. It con­sist­ed of a sin­gle sheet of iron, dark and dent­ed, with eye­holes on top and a mas­sive chain un­der­neath. It was as long as Will’s fore­arm, and as thick as his thumb.

“So this is your ar­mor,” he said. “Well, it doesn’t look very strong to me. I don’t know if I can trust it. Let me see.”

And he took the knife from the ruck­sack and rest­ed the edge against the front of the hel­met, and sliced off a cor­ner as if he were cut­ting but­ter.

“That’s what I thought,” he said, and cut an­oth­er and an­oth­er, re­duc­ing the mas­sive thing to a pile of frag­ments in less than a minute. He stood up and held out a hand­ful.

“That was your ar­mor,” he said, and dropped the pieces with a clat­ter on­to the rest at his feet, “and this is my knife. And since your hel­met was no good to me, I’ll have to fight with­out it. Are you ready, bear? I think we’re well matched. I could take off your head with one sweep of my knife, af­ter all.”

Ut­ter still­ness. The bear’s black eyes glowed like pitch, and Will felt a drop of sweat trick­le down his spine.

Then the bear’s head moved. He shook it and took a step back­ward.

“Too strong a weapon,” he said. “I can’t fight that. Boy, you win.”

Will knew that a sec­ond lat­er the peo­ple would cheer and hoot and whis­tle, so even be­fore the bear had fin­ished say­ing the word win, Will had be­gun to turn and call out, to keep them qui­et:

“Now you must keep the bar­gain. Look af­ter the wound­ed peo­ple and start re­pair­ing the build­in­gs. Then let the boat tie up and re­fu­el.”

He knew that it would take a minute to trans­late that and let the mes­sage spread out among the watch­ing towns­folk, and he knew, too, that the de­lay would pre­vent their re­lief and anger from burst­ing out, as a net of sand­banks baf­fles and breaks up the flow of a riv­er. The bear watched and saw what he was do­ing and why, and un­der­stood more ful­ly than Will him­self did what the boy had achieved.

Will put the knife back in the ruck­sack, and he and the bear ex­changed an­oth­er glance, but a dif­fer­ent kind this time. They ap­proached, and be­hind them as the bears be­gan to dis­man­tle their fire throw­er, the oth­er two ships ma­neu­vered their way to the quay­side.

On­shore some of the peo­ple set about clear­ing up, but sev­er­al more came crowd­ing to see Will, cu­ri­ous about this boy and the pow­er he had to com­mand the bear. It was time for Will to be­come in­con­spic­uous again, so he per­formed the mag­ic that had de­flect­ed all kinds of cu­rios­ity away from his moth­er and kept them safe for years. Of course it wasn’t mag­ic, but sim­ply a way of be­hav­ing. He made him­self qui­et and dulleyed and slow, and in un­der a minute he be­came less in­ter­est­ing, less at­trac­tive to hu­man at­ten­tion. The peo­ple sim­ply be­came bored with this dull child, and for­got him and turned away.

But the bear’s at­ten­tion was not hu­man, and he could see what was hap­pen­ing, and he knew it was yet an­oth­er ex­traor­di­nary pow­er at Will’s com­mand. He came close and spoke qui­et­ly, in a voice that seemed to throb as deeply as the ship’s en­gines.

“What is your name?” he said.

“Will Par­ry. Can you make an­oth­er hel­met ?”

“Yes. What do you seek?”

“You’re go­ing up the riv­er. I want to come with you. I’m go­ing to the moun­tains and this is the quick­est way. Will you take me?”

“Yes. I want to see that knife.”

“I will on­ly show it to a bear I can trust. There is one bear I’ve heard of who’s trust­wor­thy. He is the king of the bears, a good friend of the girl I’m go­ing to the moun­tains to find. Her name is Lyra Sil­ver­tongue. The bear is called Iorek Byr­ni­son.”

“I am Iorek Byr­ni­son,” said the bear.

“I know you are,” said Will.

The boat was tak­ing fu­el on board; the rail­cars were hauled along­side and tilt­ed side­ways to let coal thun­der down the chutes in­to the hold, and the black dust rose high above them. Un­no­ticed by the towns­peo­ple, who were busy sweep­ing up glass and hag­gling over the price of the fu­el, Will fol­lowed the bear­king up the gang­way and aboard the ship.





The Amber Spyglass





NINE - UPRIVER


“Let me see the knife,” said Iorek Byr­ni­son. “I un­der­stand met­al. Noth­ing made of iron or steel is a mys­tery to a bear. But I have nev­er seen a knife like yours, and I would be glad to look at it close­ly.”

Will and the bear­king were on the fore­deck of the riv­er steam­er, in the warm rays of the set­ting sun, and the ves­sel was mak­ing swift progress up­stream; there was plen­ty of fu­el on board, there was food that Will could eat, and he and Iorek Byr­ni­son were tak­ing their sec­ond mea­sure of each oth­er. They had tak­en the first al­ready.

Will held out the knife to­ward Iorek, han­dle first, and the bear took it from him del­icate­ly. His thumb claw op­posed the four fin­ger claws, let­ting him ma­nip­ulate ob­jects as skill­ful­ly as a hu­man, and now he turned the knife this way and that, bring­ing it close­ly to his eyes, hold­ing it to catch the light, test­ing the edge, the steel edge, on a piece of scrap iron.

“This edge is the one you cut my ar­mor with,” he said. “The oth­er is very strange. I can­not tell what it is, what it will do, how it was made. But I want to un­der­stand it. How did you come to pos­sess it?”

Will told him most of what had hap­pened, leav­ing out on­ly what con­cerned him alone: his moth­er, the man he killed, his fa­ther.

“You fought for this, and lost two fin­gers?” the bear said. “Show me the wound.”

Will held out his hand. Thanks to his fa­ther’s oint­ment, the raw sur­faces were heal­ing well, but they were still very ten­der. The bear sniffed at them.

“Blood­moss,” he said. “And some­thing else I can­not iden­ti­fy. Who gave you that?”

“A man who told me what I should do with the knife. Then he died. He had some oint­ment in a horn box, and it cured my wound. The witch­es tried, but their spell didn’t work.”

“And what did he tell you to do with the knife?” said Iorek Byr­ni­son, hand­ing it care­ful­ly back to Will.

“To use it in a war on the side of Lord As­riel,” Will replied. “But first I must res­cue Lyra Sil­ver­tongue.”

“Then we shall help,” said the bear, and Will’s heart leapt with plea­sure.

Over the next few days Will learned why the bears were mak­ing this voy­age in­to Cen­tral Asia, so far from their home­land.

Since the catas­tro­phe that had burst the worlds open, all the Arc­tic ice had be­gun to melt, and new and strange cur­rents ap­peared in the wa­ter. Since the bears de­pend­ed on ice and on the crea­tures who lived in the cold sea, they could see that they would soon starve if they stayed where they were; and be­ing ra­tio­nal, they de­cid­ed how they should re­spond. They would have to mi­grate to where there was snow and ice in plen­ty: they would go to the high­est moun­tains, to the range that touched the sky, half a world away but un­shak­able, eter­nal, and deep in snow. From bears of the sea they would be­come bears of the moun­tains, for as long as it took the world to set­tle it­self again.

“So you’re not mak­ing war?” Will said.

“Our old en­emies van­ished with the seals and the wal­rus­es. If we meet new ones, we know how to fight.”

“I thought there was a great war com­ing that would in­volve ev­ery­one. Which side would you fight for in that case?”

“The side that gave ad­van­tage to the bears. What else? But I have some re­gard for a few among hu­mans. One was a man who flew a bal­loon. He is dead. The oth­er is the witch Ser­afi­na Pekkala. The third is the child Lyra Sil­ver­tongue. First, I would do what­ev­er serves the bears. Sec­ond, what­ev­er serves the child, or the witch, or avenges my dead com­rade Lee Scores­by. That is why I will help you res­cue Lyra Sil­ver­tongue from the abom­in­able wom­an Coul­ter.”

He told Will of how he and a few of his sub­jects had swum to the riv­er mouth and paid for the char­ter of this ves­sel with gold, and hired the crew, and turned the drain­ing of the Arc­tic to their own ad­van­tage by let­ting the riv­er take them as far in­land as it could, and as it had its source in the north­ern foothills of the very moun­tains they sought, and as Lyra was im­pris­oned there, too, things had fall­en out well so far.

So time went past.

Dur­ing the day Will dozed on deck, rest­ing, gath­er­ing strength, be­cause he was ex­haust­ed in ev­ery part of his be­ing. He watched as the scenery be­gan to change, and the rolling steppe gave way to low grassy hills and then to high­er land, with the oc­ca­sion­al gorge or cataract; and still the boat steamed south.

He talked to the cap­tain and the crew, out of po­lite­ness, but lack­ing Lyra’s in­stant ease with strangers, he found it dif­fi­cult to think of much to say; and in any case they were lit­tle in­ter­est­ed in him. This was on­ly a job, and when it was over they would leave with­out a back­ward glance, and be­sides, they didn’t much like the bears, for all their gold. Will was a for­eign­er, and as long as he paid for his food, they cared lit­tle what he did. Be­sides, there was that strange dae­mon of his, which seemed so like a witch’s: some­times it was there, and some­times it seemed to have van­ished. Su­per­sti­tious, like many sailors, they were hap­py to leave him alone.

Balthamos, for his part, kept qui­et, too. Some­times his grief would be­come too strong for him to put up with, and he’d leave the boat and fly high among the clouds, search­ing for any patch of light or taste of air, any shoot­ing stars or pres­sure ridges that might re­mind him of ex­pe­ri­ences he had shared with Baruch. When he talked, at night in the dark of the lit­tle cab­in Will slept in, it was on­ly to re­port on how far they had gone, and how much far­ther ahead the cave and the val­ley lay. Per­haps he thought Will had lit­tle sym­pa­thy, though if he’d sought it, he would have found plen­ty. He be­came more and more curt and for­mal, though nev­er sar­cas­tic; he kept that promise, at least.

As for Iorek, he ex­am­in­ed the knife ob­ses­sive­ly. He looked at it for hours, test­ing both edges, flex­ing it, hold­ing it up to the light, touch­ing it with his tongue, sniff­ing it, and even lis­ten­ing to the sound the air made as it flowed over the sur­face. Will had no fear for the knife, be­cause Iorek was clear­ly a crafts­man of the high­est ac­com­plish­ment; nor for Iorek him­self, be­cause of the del­ica­cy of move­ment in those mighty paws.

Fi­nal­ly Iorek came to Will and said, “This oth­er edge. It does some­thing you have not told me about. What is it, and how does it work?”

“I can’t show you here,” said Will, “be­cause the boat is mov­ing. As soon as we stop, I’ll show you.”

“I can think of it,” said the bear, “but not un­der­stand what I am think­ing. It is the strangest thing I have ev­er seen.”

And he gave it back to Will, with a dis­con­cert­ing, un­read­able long stare out of his deep black eyes.

The riv­er by this time had changed col­or, be­cause it was meet­ing the re­mains of the first flood­wa­ters that had swept down out of the Arc­tic. The con­vul­sions had af­fect­ed the earth dif­fer­ent­ly in dif­fer­ent places, Will saw; vil­lage af­ter vil­lage stood up to its roofs in wa­ter and hun­dreds of dis­pos­sessed peo­ple tried to sal­vage what they could with row­boats and ca­noes. The earth must have sunk a lit­tle here, be­cause the riv­er broad­ened and slowed, and it was hard for the skip­per to trace his true course through the wide and tur­bid streams. The air was hot­ter, and the sun high­er in the sky, and the bears found it hard to keep cool; some of them swam along­side as the steam­er made its way, tast­ing their na­tive wa­ters in this for­eign land.

But even­tu­al­ly the riv­er nar­rowed and deep­ened again, and soon ahead of them be­gan to rise the moun­tains of the great cen­tral Asian plateau. Will saw a rim of white on the hori­zon one day and watched as it grew and grew, sep­arat­ing it­self in­to dif­fer­ent peaks and ridges and pass­es be­tween them, and so high that it seemed that they must be close at hand, on­ly a few miles. But they were far off still; it was just that the moun­tains were im­mense, and with ev­ery hour that they came clos­er, they seemed yet more in­con­ceiv­ably high.

Most of the bears had nev­er seen moun­tains, apart from the cliffs on their own is­land of Sval­bard, and fell silent as they looked up at the gi­ant ram­parts, still so far off.

“What will we hunt there, Iorek Byr­ni­son?” said one. “Are there seals in the moun­tains? How shall we live?”

“There is snow and ice,” was the king’s re­ply. “We shall be com­fort­able. And there are wild crea­tures there in plen­ty. Our lives will be dif­fer­ent for a while. But we shall sur­vive, and when things re­turn to what they should be, and the Arc­tic freezes once more, we shall still be alive to go back and claim it. If we had stayed there, we would have starved. Be pre­pared for strangeness and for new ways, my bears.”

Even­tu­al­ly the steam­er could sail no far­ther, be­cause at this point the riverbed had nar­rowed and be­come shal­low. The skip­per brought the ves­sel to a halt in a val­ley bot­tom that nor­mal­ly would have been car­pet­ed with grass and moun­tain flow­ers, where the riv­er would have me­an­dered over grav­el beds; but the val­ley was now a lake, and the cap­tain in­sist­ed that he dared not go past it. Be­yond this point, he ex­plained, there would be not enough depth be­low the keel, even with the mas­sive flood from the north.

So they drew up to the edge of the val­ley, where an out­crop of rock formed a sort of jet­ty, and dis­em­barked.

“Where are we now?” said Will to the cap­tain, whose En­glish was lim­it­ed.

The cap­tain found a tat­tered old map and jabbed at it with his pipe, say­ing, “This val­ley here, we now. You take, go on.”

“Thank you very much,” Will said, and won­dered if he ought to of­fer to pay; but the cap­tain had turned away to su­per­vise the un­load­ing.

Be­fore long all thir­ty or so bears and all their ar­mor were on the nar­row shore. The cap­tain shout­ed an or­der, and the ves­sel be­gan to turn pon­der­ous­ly against the cur­rent, ma­neu­ver­ing out in­to mid­stream and giv­ing a blast on the whis­tle that echoed for a long time around the val­ley.

Will sat on a rock, read­ing the map. If he was right, the val­ley where Lyra was cap­tive, ac­cord­ing to the shaman, lay some way to the east and the south, and the best way there led through a pass called Sungchen.

“Bears, mark this place,” said Iorek Byr­ni­son to his sub­jects. “When the time comes for us to move back to the Arc­tic, we shall as­sem­ble here. Now go your ways, hunt, feed, and live. Do not make war. We are not here for war. If war threat­ens, I shall call for you.”

The bears were soli­tary crea­tures for the most part, and they on­ly came to­geth­er in times of war or emer­gen­cy. Now that they were at the edge of a land of snow, they were im­pa­tient to be off, each of them, ex­plor­ing on their own.

“Come, then, Will,” said Iorek Byr­ni­son, “and we shall find Lyra.”

Will lift­ed his ruck­sack and they set off.

It was good walk­ing for the first part of their jour­ney. The sun was warm, but the pines and the rho­do­den­drons kept the worst of the heat off their shoul­ders, and the air was fresh and clear. The ground was rocky, but the rocks were thick with moss and pine nee­dles, and the slopes they climbed were not pre­cip­itous. Will found him­self rel­ish­ing the ex­er­cise. The days he had spent on the boat, the en­forced rest, had built up his strength. When he had come across Iorek, he had been at the very last of it. He didn’t know that, but the bear did.

And as soon as they were alone, Will showed Iorek how the oth­er edge of the knife worked. He opened a world where a trop­ical rain for­est steamed and dripped, and where va­pors laden with heavy scent drift­ed out in­to the thin moun­tain air. Iorek watched close­ly, and touched the edge of the win­dow with his paw, and sniffed at it, and stepped through in­to the hot, moist air to look around in si­lence. The mon­key shrieks and bird­calls, the in­sect scrap­in­gs and frog croak­in­gs, and the in­ces­sant drip­drip of con­dens­ing mois­ture sound­ed very loud to Will, out­side it.

Then Iorek came back and watched Will close the win­dow, and asked to see the knife again, peer­ing so close­ly at the sil­ver edge that Will thought he was in dan­ger of cut­ting his eye. He ex­am­in­ed it for a long time and hand­ed it back with hard­ly a word, on­ly say­ing, “I was right: I could not have fought this.”

They moved on, speak­ing lit­tle, which suit­ed them both, Iorek Byr­ni­son caught a gazelle and ate most of it, leav­ing the ten­der meat for Will to cook; and once they came to a vil­lage, and while Iorek wait­ed in the for­est, Will ex­changed one of his gold coins for some flat, coarse bread and some dried fruit, and for boots of yak leather and a waist­coat of a kind of sheep­skin, for it was be­com­ing cold at night.

He al­so man­aged to ask about the val­ley with the rain­bows. Balthamos helped by as­sum­ing the form of a crow, like the dae­mon of the man Will was speak­ing to; he made the pas­sage of un­der­stand­ing eas­ier be­tween them, and Will got di­rec­tions, which were help­ful and clear.

It was an­oth­er three days’ walk. Well, they were get­ting there.

And so were oth­ers.

Lord As­riel’s force, the squadron of gy­ropters and the zep­pelin fu­el tanker, had reached the open­ing be­tween the worlds: the breach in the sky above Sval­bard. They had a very long way to go still, but they flew with­out pause ex­cept for es­sen­tial main­te­nance, and the com­man­der, the Afric King is Ogun­we, kept in twicedai­ly touch with the basalt fortress. He had a Gal­livespi­an lode­stone op­er­ator aboard his gy­ropter, and through him he was able to learn as quick­ly as Lord As­riel him­self about what was go­ing on else­where.

The news was dis­con­cert­ing. The lit­tle spy, the La­dy Salmakia, had watched from the shad­ows as the two pow­er­ful arms of the Church, the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline and the So­ci­ety of the Work of the Holy Spir­it, agreed to put their dif­fer­ences aside and pool their knowl­edge. The So­ci­ety had a swifter and more skill­ful alethiometrist than Fra Pavel, and thanks to him, the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court now knew ex­act­ly where Lyra was, and more: they knew that Lord As­riel had sent a force to res­cue her. Wast­ing no time, the Court com­man­deered a flight of zep­pelins, and that same day a bat­tal­ion of the Swiss Guard be­gan to em­bark aboard the zep­pelins wait­ing in the still air be­side the Lake of Gene­va.

So each side was aware that the oth­er was al­so mak­ing its way to­ward the cave in the moun­tains. And they both knew that who­ev­er got there first would have the ad­van­tage, but there wasn’t much in it: Lord As­riel’s gy­ropters were faster than the zep­pelins of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, but they had far­ther to fly, and they were lim­it­ed by the speed of their own zep­pelin tanker.

And there was an­oth­er con­sid­er­ation: who­ev­er seized Lyra first would have to fight their way out against the oth­er force. It would be eas­ier for the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, be­cause they didn’t have to con­sid­er get­ting Lyra away safe­ly. They were fly­ing there to kill her.

The zep­pelin car­ry­ing the Pres­ident of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court was car­ry­ing oth­er pas­sen­gers as well, un­known to him. The Che­va­li­er Tialys had re­ceived a mes­sage on his lode­stone res­ona­tor, or­der­ing him and the La­dy Sal­rnakia to smug­gle them­selves aboard. When the zep­pelins ar­rived at the val­ley, he and the La­dy were to go ahead and make their way in­de­pen­dent­ly to the cave where Lyra was held, and pro­tect her as well as they could un­til King Ogun­we’s force ar­rived to res­cue her. Her safe­ty was to come above ev­ery oth­er con­sid­er­ation.

Get­ting them­selves aboard the zep­pelin was haz­ar­dous for the spies, not least be­cause of the equip­ment they had to car­ry. Apart from the lode­stone res­ona­tor, the most im­por­tant items were a pair of in­sect lar­vae, and their food. When the adult in­sects emerged, they would be more like drag­on­flies than any­thing else, but they were not like any kind of drag­on­fly that the hu­mans of Will’s world, or Lyra’s, would have seen be­fore. They were very much larg­er, for one thing. The Gal­livespi­ans bred these crea­tures care­ful­ly, and each clan’s in­sects dif­fered from the rest. The Che­va­li­er Tialys’s clan bred pow­er­ful redandyel­low­striped drag­on­flies with vig­or­ous and bru­tal ap­pe­tites, where­as the one the La­dy Sal­rnakia was nur­tur­ing would be a slen­der, fast­fly­ing crea­ture with an elec­tric blue body and the pow­er of glow­ing in the dark.

Ev­ery spy was equipped with a num­ber of these lar­vae, which, by feed­ing them care­ful­ly reg­ulat­ed amounts of oil and hon­ey, they could ei­ther keep in sus­pend­ed an­ima­tion or bring rapid­ly to adult­hood. Tialys and Salmakia had thir­tysix hours, de­pend­ing on the winds, to hatch these lar­vae now, be­cause that was about the time the flight would take, and they need­ed the in­sects to emerge be­fore the zep­pelins land­ed.

The Che­va­li­er and his col­league found an over­looked space be­hind a bulk­head, and made them­selves as safe as they could while the ves­sel was load­ed and fu­eled; and then the en­gines be­gan to roar, shak­ing the light struc­ture from end to end as the ground crew cast off and the eight zep­pelins rose in­to the night sky.

Their kind would have re­gard­ed the com­par­ison as a mor­tal in­sult, but they were able to con­ceal them­selves at least as well as rats. From their hid­ing place, the Gal­livespi­ans could over­hear a good deal, and they kept in hourly touch with Lord Roke, who was aboard King Ogun­we’s gy­ropter.

But there was one thing they couldn’t learn any more about on the zep­pelin, be­cause the Pres­ident nev­er spoke of it: and that was the mat­ter of the as­sas­sin, Fa­ther Gomez, who had been ab­solved al­ready of the sin he was go­ing to com­mit if the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court failed in their mis­sion. Fa­ther Gomez was some­where else, and no one was track­ing him at all.





The Amber Spyglass





TEN - WHEELS


“Yeah,” said the red­haired girl, in the gar­den of the de­sert­ed casi­no. “We seen her, me and Pao­lo both seen her. She come through here days ago.”

Fa­ther Gomez said, “And do you re­mem­ber what she looked like?”

“She look hot,” said the lit­tle boy. “Sweaty in the face, all right.”

“How old did she seem to be?”

“About…” said the girl, con­sid­er­ing, “I sup­pose maybe forty or fifty. We didn’t see her close. She could be thir­ty, maybe. But she was hot, like Pao­lo said, and she was car­ry­ing a big ruck­sack, much big­ger than yours, this big…”

Pao­lo whis­pered some­thing to her, screw­ing up his eyes to look at the priest as he did so. The sun was bright in his face.

“Yeah,” said the girl im­pa­tient­ly, “I know. The Specters,” she said to Fa­ther Gomez, “she wasn’ afraid of the Specters at all. She just walked through the city and nev­er wor­ried a bit. I ain’ nev­er seen a grownup do that be­fore, all right. She looked like she didn’ know about them, even. Same as you,” she added, look­ing at him with a chal­lenge in her eyes.

“There’s a lot I don’t know,” said Fa­ther Gomez mild­ly.

The lit­tle boy plucked at her sleeve and whis­pered again.

“Pao­lo says,” she told the priest, “he thinks you’re go­ing to get the knife back.”

Fa­ther Gomez felt his skin bris­tle. He re­mem­bered the tes­ti­mo­ny of Fra Pavel in the in­quiry at the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court: this must be the knife he meant.

“If I can,” he said, “I shall. The knife comes from here, does it?”

“From the Torre degli An­geli,” said the girl, point­ing at the square stone tow­er over the red­brown rooftops. It shim­mered in the mid­day glare. “And the boy who stole it, he kill our broth­er, Tul­lio. The Specters got him, all right. You want to kill that boy, that’s okay. And the girl, she was a liar, she was as bad as him.”

“There was a girl, too?” said the priest, try­ing not to seem too in­ter­est­ed.

“Ly­ing filth,” spat the red­haired child. “We near­ly killed them both, but then there came some wom­en, fly­ing wom­en… ‘

“Witch­es,” said Pao­lo.

“Witch­es, and we couldn’ fight them. They took them away, the girl and boy. We don’ know where they went. But the wom­an, she came lat­er. We thought maybe she got some kind of knife, to keep the Specters away, all right. And maybe you have, too,” she added, lift­ing her chin to stare at him bold­ly.

“I have no knife,” said Fa­ther Gomez. “But I have a sa­cred task. Maybe that is pro­tect­ing me against these, Specters.”

“Yeah,” said the girl, “maybe. Any­way, you want her, she went south, to­ward the moun­tains. We don’ know where. But you ask any­one, they know if she go past, be­cause there ain’ no one like her in Ci’gazze, not be­fore and not now. She be easy to find.”

“Thank you, An­gel­ica,” said the priest. “Bless you, my chil­dren.”

He shoul­dered his pack, left the gar­den, and set off through the hot, silent streets, sat­is­fied.

Af­ter three days in the com­pa­ny of the wheeled crea­tures, Mary Mal­one knew rather more about them, and they knew a great deal about her.

That first morn­ing they car­ried her for an hour or so along the basalt high­way to a set­tle­ment by a riv­er, and the jour­ney was un­com­fort­able; she had noth­ing to hold on to, and the crea­ture’s back was hard. They sped along at a pace that fright­ened her, but the thun­der of their wheels on the hard road and the beat of their scud­ding feet made her ex­hil­arat­ed enough to ig­nore the dis­com­fort.

And in the course of the ride she be­came more aware of the crea­tures’ phys­iol­ogy. Like the graz­ers’ skele­tons, theirs had a di­amond­shaped frame, with a limb at each of the com­ers. Some­time in the dis­tant past, a line of an­ces­tral crea­tures must have de­vel­oped this struc­ture and found it worked, just as gen­er­ations of lon­ga­go crawl­ing things in Mary’s world had de­vel­oped the cen­tral spine.

The basalt high­way led grad­ual­ly down­ward, and af­ter a while the slope in­creased, so the crea­tures could free­wheel. They tucked their side legs up and steered by lean­ing to one side or the oth­er, and hur­tled along at a speed Mary found ter­ri­fy­ing, though she had to ad­mit that the crea­ture she was rid­ing nev­er gave her the slight­est feel­ing of dan­ger. If on­ly she’d had some­thing to hold on to, she would have en­joyed it.

At the foot of the mile­long slope, there was a stand of the great trees, and near­by a riv­er me­an­dered on the lev­el grassy ground. Some way off, Mary saw a gleam that looked like a wider ex­panse of wa­ter, but she didn’t spend long look­ing at that, be­cause the crea­tures were mak­ing for a set­tle­ment on the riv­er­bank, and she was burn­ing with cu­rios­ity to see it.

There were twen­ty or thir­ty huts, rough­ly grouped in a cir­cle, made of, she had to shade her eyes against the sun to see, wood­en beams cov­ered with a kind of wat­tle­and­daub mix­ture on the walls and thatch on the roofs. Oth­er wheeled crea­tures were work­ing: some re­pair­ing a roof, oth­ers haul­ing a net out of the riv­er, oth­ers bring­ing brush­wood for a fire.

So they had lan­guage, and they had fire, and they had so­ci­ety. And about then she found an ad­just­ment be­ing made in her mind, as the word crea­tures be­came the word peo­ple. These be­in­gs weren’t hu­man, but they were peo­ple, she told her­self; it’s not them, they’re us.

They were quite close now, and see­ing what was com­ing, some of the vil­lagers looked up and called to each oth­er to look. The par­ty from the road slowed to a halt, and Mary clam­bered stiffly down, know­ing that she would ache lat­er on.

“Thank you,” she said to her, her what? Her steed? Her cy­cle? Both ideas were ab­surd­ly wrong for the brighteyed ami­abil­ity that stood be­side her. She set­tled for, friend.

He raised his trunk and im­itat­ed her words:

“Anku,” he said, and again they laughed, in high spir­its.

She took her ruck­sack from the oth­er crea­ture (”Anku! Anku!”) and walked with them off the basalt and on to the hard­packed earth of the vil­lage.

And then her ab­sorp­tion tru­ly be­gan.

In the next few days she learned so much that she felt like a child again, be­wil­dered by school. What was more, the wheeled peo­ple seemed to be just as won­der­struck by her. Her hands, to be­gin with. They couldn’t get enough of them: their del­icate trunks felt over ev­ery joint, search­ing out thumbs, knuck­les, and fin­ger­nails, flex­ing them gen­tly, and they watched with amaze­ment as she picked up her ruck­sack, con­veyed food to her mouth, scratched, combed her hair, washed. In re­turn, they let her feel their trunks. They were in­fi­nite­ly flex­ible, and about as long as her arm, thick­er where they joined the head, and quite pow­er­ful enough to crush her skull, she guessed. The two fin­ger­like pro­jec­tions at the tip were ca­pa­ble of enor­mous force and great gen­tle­ness; the crea­tures seemed to be able to vary the tone of their skin on the un­der­side, on their equiv­alent of fin­ger­tips, from a soft vel­vet to a so­lid­ity like wood. As a re­sult, they could use them for both a del­icate task like milk­ing a graz­er and the rough busi­ness of tear­ing and shap­ing branch­es.

Lit­tle by lit­tle, Mary re­al­ized that their trunks were play­ing a part in com­mu­ni­ca­tion, too. A move­ment of the trunk would mod­ify the mean­ing of a sound, so the word that sound­ed like “chuh” meant wa­ter when it was ac­com­pa­nied by a sweep of the trunk from left to right, rain when the trunk curled up at the tip, sad­ness when it curled un­der, and young shoots of grass when it made a quick flick to the left. As soon as she saw this, Mary im­itat­ed it, mov­ing her arm as best she could in the same way, and when the crea­tures re­al­ized that she was be­gin­ning to talk to them, their de­light was ra­di­ant.

Once they had be­gun to talk (most­ly in the wheeled peo­ple’s lan­guage, al­though she man­aged to teach them a few words of En­glish: they could say “anku” and “grass” and “tree” and “sky” and “riv­er,” and pro­nounce her name, with a lit­tle dif­fi­cul­ty) they pro­gressed much more quick­ly. Their word for them­selves as a peo­ple was mule­fa, but an in­di­vid­ual was a za­lif. Mary thought there was a dif­fer­ence be­tween the sounds for heza­lif and sheali, but it was too sub­tle for her to im­itate eas­ily. She be­gan to write it all down and com­pile a dic­tio­nary.

But be­fore she let her­self be­come tru­ly ab­sorbed, she took out her bat­tered pa­per­back and the yarrow stalks, and asked the I Ching: Should I be here do­ing this, or should I go on some­where else and keep search­ing?

The re­ply came: Keep­ing still, so that rest­less­ness dis­solves; then, be­yond the tu­mult, one can per­ceive the great laws.

It went on: As a moun­tain keeps still with­in it­self, thus a wise man does not per­mit his will to stray be­yond his sit­ua­tion.

That could hard­ly be clear­er. She fold­ed the stalks away and closed the book, and then re­al­ized that she’d drawn a cir­cle of watch­ing crea­tures around her.

One said, Ques­tion? Per­mis­sion? Cu­ri­ous.

She said, Please. Look.

Very del­icate­ly their trunks moved, sort­ing through the stalks in the same count­ing move­ment she’d been mak­ing, or turn­ing the pages of the book. One thing they were as­ton­ished by was the dou­ble­ness of her hands: by the fact that she could both hold the book and turn the pages at the same time. They loved to watch her lace her fin­gers to­geth­er, or play the child­hood game of “This is the church, and this is the steeple,” or make that overan­dover thumbtoop­po­site fore­fin­ger move­ment that was what Ama was us­ing, at ex­act­ly the same mo­ment in Lyra’s world, as a charm to keep evil spir­its away.

Once they had ex­am­in­ed the yarrow stalks and the book, they fold­ed the cloth over them care­ful­ly and put them with the book in­to her ruck­sack. She was hap­py and re­as­sured by the mes­sage from an­cient Chi­na, be­cause it meant that what she want­ed most to do was ex­act­ly, at that mo­ment, what she should do.

So she set her­self to learn­ing more about the mule­fa, with a cheer­ful heart.

She learned that there were two sex­es, and that they lived monog­amous­ly in cou­ples. Their off­spring had long child­hoods, ten years at least, grow­ing very slow­ly, as far as she could in­ter­pret their ex­pla­na­tion. There were five young ones in this set­tle­ment, one al­most grown and the oth­ers some­where in be­tween, and be­ing small­er than the adults, they could not man­age the seed­pod wheels. The chil­dren had to move as the graz­ers did, with all four feet on the ground, but for all their en­er­gy and ad­ven­tur­ous­ness (skip­ping up to Mary and shy­ing away, try­ing to clam­ber up tree trunks, floun­der­ing in the shal­low wa­ter, and so on), they seemed clum­sy, as if they were in the wrong el­ement. The speed and pow­er and grace of the adults was startling by con­trast, and Mary saw how much a grow­ing young­ster must long for the day when the wheels would fit. She watched the old­est child, one day, go qui­et­ly to the store­house where a num­ber of seed­pods were kept, and try to fit his fore­claw in­to the cen­tral hole; but when he tried to stand up, he fell over at once, trap­ping him­self, and the sound at­tract­ed an adult. The child strug­gled to get free, squeak­ing with anx­iety, and Mary couldn’t help laugh­ing at the sight, at the in­dig­nant par­ent and the guilty child, who pulled him­self out at the last minute and scam­pered away.

The seed­pod wheels were clear­ly of the ut­most im­por­tance, and soon Mary be­gan to see just how valu­able they were.

The mule­fa spent much of their time, to be­gin with, in main­tain­ing their wheels. By deft­ly lift­ing and twist­ing the claw, they could slip it out of the hole, and then they used their trunks to ex­am­ine the wheel all over, clean­ing the rim, check­ing for cracks. The claw was formidably strong: a spur of horn or bone at right an­gles to the leg, and slight­ly curved so that the high­est part, in the mid­dle, bore the weight as it rest­ed on the in­side of the hole. Mary watched one day as a za­lif ex­am­in­ed the hole in her front wheel, touch­ing here and there, lift­ing her trunk up in the air and back again, as if sam­pling the scent.

Mary re­mem­bered the oil she’d found on her fin­gers when she had ex­am­in­ed the first seed­pod. With the za­lifs per­mis­sion she looked at her claw, and found the sur­face more smooth and slick than any­thing she’d felt on her world. Her fin­gers sim­ply would not stay on the sur­face. The whole of the claw seemed im­preg­nat­ed with the faint­ly fra­grant oil, and af­ter she had seen a num­ber of the vil­lagers sam­pling, test­ing, check­ing the state of their wheels and their claws, she be­gan to won­der which had come first: wheel or claw? Rid­er or tree?

Al­though of course there was a third el­ement as well, and that was ge­ol­ogy. Crea­tures could on­ly use wheels on a world that pro­vid­ed them with nat­ural high­ways. There must be some fea­ture of the min­er­al con­tent of these stone roads that made them run in rib­bon­like lines over the vast sa­van­na, and be so re­sis­tant to weath­er­ing or crack­ing. Lit­tle by lit­tle, Mary came to see the way ev­ery­thing was linked to­geth­er, and all of it, seem­ing­ly, man­aged by the mule­fa. They knew the lo­ca­tion of ev­ery herd of graz­ers, ev­ery stand of wheel trees, ev­ery clump of sweet grass, and they knew ev­ery in­di­vid­ual with­in the herds, and ev­ery sep­arate tree, and they dis­cussed their wellbe­ing and their fate. On one oc­ca­sion she saw the mule­fa cull a herd of graz­ers, se­lect­ing some in­di­vid­uals and herd­ing them away from the rest, to dis­patch them by break­ing their necks with a wrench of a pow­er­ful trunk. Noth­ing was wast­ed. Hold­ing flakes of ra­zor­sharp stone in their trunks, the mule­fa skinned and gut­ted the an­imals with­in min­utes, and then be­gan a skill­ful butch­ery, sep­arat­ing out the of­fal and the ten­der meat and the tougher joints, trim­ming the fat, re­mov­ing the horns and the hooves, and work­ing so ef­fi­cient­ly that Mary watched with the plea­sure she felt at see­ing any­thing done well.

Soon strips of meat were hang­ing to dry in the sun, and oth­ers were packed in salt and wrapped in leaves; the skins were scraped clear of fat, which was set by for lat­er use, and then laid to soak in pits of wa­ter filled with oak bark to tan; and the old­est child was play­ing with a set of horns, pre­tend­ing to be a graz­er, mak­ing the oth­er chil­dren laugh. That evening there was fresh meat to eat, and Mary feast­ed well.

In a sim­ilar way the mule­fa knew where the best fish were to be had, and ex­act­ly when and where to lay their nets. Look­ing for some­thing she could do, Mary went to the net­mak­ers and of­fered to help. When she saw how they worked, not on their own but two by two, work­ing their trunks to­geth­er to tie a knot, she re­al­ized why they’d been so as­ton­ished by her hands, be­cause of course she could tie knots on her own. At first she felt that this gave her an ad­van­tage, she need­ed no one else, and then she re­al­ized how it cut her off from oth­ers. Per­haps all hu­man be­in­gs were like that. And from that time on, she used one hand to knot the fibers, shar­ing the task with a fe­male za­lif who had be­come her par­tic­ular friend, fin­gers and trunk mov­ing in and out to­geth­er.

But of all the liv­ing things the wheeled peo­ple man­aged, it was the seed­pod trees that they took most care with.

There were half a dozen groves with­in the area looked af­ter by this group. There were oth­ers far­ther away, but they were the re­spon­si­bil­ity of oth­er groups. Each day a par­ty went out to check on the wellbe­ing of the mighty trees, and to har­vest any fall­en seed­pods. It was clear what the mule­fa gained; but how did the trees ben­efit from this in­ter­change? One day she saw. As she was rid­ing along with the group, sud­den­ly there was a loud crack, and ev­ery­one came to a halt, sur­round­ing one in­di­vid­ual whose wheel had split. Ev­ery group car­ried a spare or two with it, so the za­lif with the bro­ken wheel was soon re­mount­ed; but the bro­ken wheel it­self was care­ful­ly wrapped in a cloth and tak­en back to the set­tle­ment.

There they prized it open and took out all the seeds, flat pale ovals as big as Mary’s lit­tle fin­ger­nail, and ex­am­in­ed each one care­ful­ly. They ex­plained that the seed­pods need­ed the con­stant pound­ing they got on the hard roads if they were to crack at all, and al­so that the seeds were dif­fi­cult to ger­mi­nate. With­out the mule­fa’s at­ten­tion, the trees would all die.

Each species de­pend­ed on the oth­er, and fur­ther­more, it was the oil that made it pos­si­ble. It was hard to un­der­stand, but they seemed to be say­ing that the oil was the cen­ter of their think­ing and feel­ing; that young ones didn’t have the wis­dom of their el­ders be­cause they couldn’t use the wheels, and thus could ab­sorb no oil through their claws.

And that was when Mary be­gan to see the con­nec­tion be­tween the mule­fa and the ques­tion that had oc­cu­pied the past few years of her life.

But be­fore she could ex­am­ine it any fur­ther (and con­ver­sa­tions with the mule­fa were long and com­plex, be­cause they loved qual­ify­ing and ex­plain­ing and il­lus­trat­ing their ar­gu­ments with dozens of ex­am­ples, as if they had for­got­ten noth­ing and ev­ery­thing they had ev­er known was avail­able im­me­di­ate­ly for ref­er­ence), the set­tle­ment was at­tacked.

Mary was the first to see the at­tack­ers com­ing, though she didn’t know what they were.

It hap­pened in midafter­noon, when she was help­ing re­pair the roof of a hut. The mule­fa on­ly built one sto­ry high, be­cause they were not climbers; but Mary was hap­py to clam­ber above the ground, and she could lay thatch and knot it in place with her two hands, once they had shown her the tech­nique, much more quick­ly than they could.

So she was braced against the rafters of a house, catch­ing the bun­dles of reeds thrown up to her, and en­joy­ing the cool breeze from the wa­ter that was tem­per­ing the heat of the sun, when her eye was caught by a flash of white.

It came from that dis­tant glit­ter she thought was the sea. She shad­ed her eyes and saw one, two, more, a fleet of tall white sails, emerg­ing out of the heat haze, some way off but mak­ing with a silent grace for the riv­er mouth.

Mary called the za­lif from be­low. What are you see­ing?

She didn’t know the word for sail, or boat, so she said tail, white, many.

At once the za­lif gave a call of alarm, and ev­ery­one in earshot stopped work and sped to the cen­ter of the set­tle­ment, call­ing the young ones. With­in a minute all the mule­fa were ready to flee.

Atal, her friend, called: Mary! Mary! Come! Tu­alapil Tu­alapi!

It had all hap­pened so quick­ly that Mary had hard­ly moved. The white sails by this time had al­ready en­tered the riv­er, eas­ily mak­ing head­way against the cur­rent. Mary was im­pressed by the dis­ci­pline of the sailors: they tacked so swift­ly, the sails mov­ing to­geth­er like a flock of star­lings, all chang­ing di­rec­tion si­mul­ta­ne­ous­ly. And they were so beau­ti­ful, those snow white slen­der sails, bend­ing and dip­ping and fill­ing…

There were forty of them, at least, and they were com­ing up­riv­er much more swift­ly than she’d thought. But she saw no crew on board, and then she re­al­ized that they weren’t boats at all: they were gi­gan­tic birds, and the sails were their wings, one fore and one aft, held up­right and flexed and trimmed by the pow­er of their own mus­cles.

There was no time to stop and study them, be­cause they had al­ready reached the bank, and were climb­ing out. They had necks like swans, and beaks as long as her fore­arm. Their wings were twice as tall as she was, and, she glanced back, fright­ened now, over her shoul­der as she fled, they had pow­er­ful legs: no won­der they had moved so fast on the wa­ter.

She ran hard af­ter the mule­fa, who were call­ing her name as they streamed out of the set­tle­ment and on­to the high­way. She reached them just in time: her friend Atal was wait­ing, and as Mary scram­bled on her back, Atal beat the road with her feet, speed­ing away up the slope af­ter her com­pan­ions.

The birds, who couldn’t move as fast on land, soon gave up the chase and turned back to the set­tle­ment.

They tore open the food stores, snarling and growl­ing and toss­ing their great cru­el beaks high as they sw­al­lowed the dried meat and all the pre­served fruit and grain. Ev­ery­thing ed­ible was gone in un­der a minute.

And then the tu­alapi found the wheel store, and tried to smash open the great seed­pods, but that was be­yond them. Mary felt her friends tense with alarm all around her as they watched from the crest of the low hill and saw pod af­ter pod hurled to the ground, kicked, rasped by the claws on the mighty legs, but of course no harm came to them from that. What wor­ried the mule­fa was that sev­er­al of them were pushed and shoved and nudged to­ward the wa­ter, where they float­ed heav­ily down­stream to­ward the sea.

Then the great snowwhite birds set about de­mol­ish­ing ev­ery­thing they could see with bru­tal, rak­ing blows of their feet and stab­bing, smash­ing, shak­ing, tear­ing move­ments of their beaks. The mule­fa around her were mur­mur­ing, al­most croon­ing with sor­row.

I help, Mary said. We make again.

But the foul crea­tures hadn’t fin­ished yet; hold­ing their beau­ti­ful wings high, they squat­ted among the dev­as­ta­tion and void­ed their bow­els. The smell drift­ed up the slope with the breeze; heaps and pools of green­black­brown­white dung lay among the bro­ken beams, the scat­tered thatch. Then, their clum­sy move­ment on land giv­ing them a swag­ger­ing strut, the birds went back to the wa­ter and sailed away down­stream to­ward the sea.

On­ly when the last white wing had van­ished in the af­ter­noon haze did the mule­fa ride down the high­way again. They were full of sor­row and anger, but main­ly they were pow­er­ful­ly anx­ious about the seed­pod store.

Out of the fif­teen pods that had been there, on­ly two were left. The rest had been pushed in­to the wa­ter and lost. But there was a sand­bank in the next bend of the riv­er, and Mary thought she could spot a wheel that was caught there; so to the mule­fa’s sur­prise and alarm, she took off her clothes, wound a length of cord around her waist, and swam across to it. On the sand­bank she found not one but five of the pre­cious wheels, and pass­ing the cord through their soft­en­ing cen­ters, she swam heav­ily back, pulling them be­hind her.

The mule­fa were full of grat­itude. They nev­er en­tered the wa­ter them­selves, and on­ly fished from the bank, tak­ing care to keep their feet and wheels dry. Mary felt she had done some­thing use­ful for them at last.

Lat­er that night, af­ter a scanty meal of sweet roots, they told her why they had been so anx­ious about the wheels. There had once been a time when the seed­pods were plen­ti­ful, and when the world was rich and full of life, and the mule­fa lived with their trees in per­pet­ual joy. But some­thing bad had hap­pened many years ago, some virtue had gone out of the world, be­cause de­spite ev­ery ef­fort and all the love and at­ten­tion the mule­fa could give them, the wheel­pod trees were dy­ing.





The Amber Spyglass





ELEVEN - THE DRAGONFLIES


Ama climbed the path to the cave, bread and milk in the bag on her back, a heavy puz­zle­ment in her heart. How in the world could she ev­er man­age to reach the sleep­ing girl?

She came to the rock where the wom­an had told her to leave the food. She put it down, but she didn’t go straight home; she climbed a lit­tle far­ther, up past the cave and through the thick rho­do­den­drons, and far­ther up still to where the trees thinned out and the rain­bows be­gan.

There she and her dae­mon played a game: they climbed up over the rock shelves and around the lit­tle green­white cataracts, past the whirlpools and through the spec­trum tint­ed spray, un­til her hair and her eye­lids and his squir­rel fur were bead­ed all over with a mil­li­on tiny pearls of mois­ture. The game was to get to the top with­out wip­ing your eyes, de­spite the temp­ta­tion, and soon the sun­light sparkled and frac­tured in­to red, yel­low, green, blue, and all the col­ors in be­tween, but she mustn’t brush her hand across to see bet­ter un­til she got right to the top, or the game would be lost.

Ku­lang, her dae­mon, sprang to a rock near the top of the lit­tle wa­ter­fall, and she knew he’d turn at once to make sure she didn’t brush the mois­ture off her eye­lash­es, ex­cept that he didn’t.

In­stead, he clung there, gaz­ing for­ward.

Ama wiped her eyes, be­cause the game was can­celed by the sur­prise her dae­mon was feel­ing. As she pulled her­self up to look over the edge, she gasped and fell still, be­cause look­ing down at her was the face of a crea­ture she had nev­er seen be­fore: a bear, but im­mense, ter­ri­fy­ing, four times the size of the brown bears in the for­est, and ivory white, with a black nose and black eyes and claws the length of dag­gers. He was on­ly an arm’s length away. She could see ev­ery sep­arate hair on his head.

“Who’s that?” said the voice of a boy, and while Ama couldn’t un­der­stand the words, she caught the sense eas­ily enough.

Af­ter a mo­ment the boy ap­peared next to the bear: fiercelook­ing, with frown­ing eyes and a jut­ting jaw. And was that a dae­mon be­side him, bird­shaped? But such a strange bird: un­like any she’d seen be­fore. It flew to Ku­lang and spoke briefly: Friends. We shan’t hurt you.

The great white bear hadn’t moved at all.

“Come up,” said the boy, and again her dae­mon made sense of it for her.

Watch­ing the bear with su­per­sti­tious awe, Ama scram­bled up be­side the lit­tle wa­ter­fall and stood shy­ly on the rocks. Ku­lang be­came a but­ter­fly and set­tled for a mo­ment on her cheek, but left it to flut­ter around the oth­er dae­mon, who sat still on the boy’s hand.

“Will,” said the boy, point­ing to him­self.

She re­spond­ed, “Ama.” Now that she could see him prop­er­ly, she was fright­ened of the boy al­most more than the bear: he had a hor­ri­ble wound: two of his fin­gers were miss­ing. She felt dizzy when she saw it.

The bear turned away along the milky stream and lay down in the wa­ter, as if to cool him­self. The boy’s dae­mon took to the air and flut­tered with Ku­lang among the rain­bows, and slow­ly they be­gan to un­der­stand each oth­er.

And what should they turn out to be look­ing for but a cave, with a girl asleep?

The words tum­bled out of her in re­sponse: “I know where it is! And she’s be­ing kept asleep by a wom­an who says she is her moth­er, but no moth­er would be so cru­el, would she? She makes her drink some­thing to keep her asleep, but I have some herbs to make her wake up, if on­ly I could get to her!”

Will could on­ly shake his head and wait for Balthamos to trans­late. It took more than a minute.

“Iorek,” he called, and the bear lum­bered along the bed of the stream, lick­ing his chops, for he had just sw­al­lowed a fish, “Iorek,” Will said, “this girl is say­ing she knows where Lyra is. I’ll go with her to look, while you stay here and watch.”

Iorek Byr­ni­son, foursquare in the stream, nod­ded silent­ly. Will hid his ruck­sack and buck­led on the knife be­fore clam­ber­ing down through the rain­bows with Ama. The mist that filled the air was icy. He had to brush his eyes and peer through the daz­zle to see where it was safe to put his feet.

When they reached the foot of the falls, Ama in­di­cat­ed that they should go care­ful­ly and make no noise, and Will walked be­hind her down the slope, be­tween mossy rocks and great gnarled pine trunks where the dap­pled light danced in­tense­ly green and a bil­li­on tiny in­sects scraped and sang. Down they went, and far­ther down, and still the sun­light fol­lowed them, deep in­to the val­ley, while over­head the branch­es tossed un­ceas­ing­ly in the bright sky.

Then Ama halt­ed. Will drew him­self be­hind the mas­sive bole of a cedar, and looked where she was point­ing. Through a tan­gle of leaves and branch­es, he saw the side of a cliff, ris­ing up to the right, and part­way up…

“Mrs. Coul­ter,” he whis­pered, and his heart was beat­ing fast.

The wom­an ap­peared from be­hind the rock and shook out a thick­leaved branch be­fore drop­ping it and brush­ing her hands to­geth­er. Had she been sweep­ing the floor? Her sleeves were rolled, and her hair was bound up with a scarf. Will could nev­er have imag­in­ed her look­ing so do­mes­tic.

But then there was a flash of gold, and that vi­cious mon­key ap­peared, leap­ing up to her shoul­der. As if they sus­pect­ed some­thing, they looked all around, and sud­den­ly Mrs. Coul­ter didn’t look do­mes­tic at all.

Ama was whis­per­ing ur­gent­ly: she was afraid of the gold­en mon­key dae­mon; he liked to tear the wings off bats while they were still alive.

“Is there any­one else with her?” Will said. “No sol­diers, or any­one like that?”

Ama didn’t know. She had nev­er seen sol­diers, but peo­ple did talk about strange and fright­en­ing men, or they might be ghosts, seen on the moun­tain­sides at night… But there had al­ways been ghosts in the moun­tains, ev­ery­one knew that. So they might not have any­thing to do with the wom­an.

Well, thought Will, if Lyra’s in the cave and Mrs. Coul­ter doesn’t leave it, I’ll have to go and pay a call.

He said, “What is this drug you have? What do you have to do with it to wake her up?”

Ama ex­plained.

“And where is it now?”

In her home, she said. Hid­den away.

“All right. Wait here and don’t come near. When you see her, you mustn’t say that you know me. You’ve nev­er seen me, or the bear. When do you next bring her food?”

Half an hour be­fore sun­set, Ama’s dae­mon said.

“Bring the medicine with you then,” said Will. “I’ll meet you here.”

She watched with great un­ease as he set off along the path. Sure­ly he didn’t be­lieve what she had just told him about the mon­key dae­mon, or he wouldn’t walk so reck­less­ly up to the cave.

Ac­tu­al­ly, Will felt very ner­vous. All his sens­es seemed to be clar­ified, so that he was aware of the ti­ni­est in­sects drift­ing in the sun shafts and the rus­tle of ev­ery leaf and the move­ment of the clouds above, even though his eyes nev­er left the cave mouth.

“Balthamos,” he whis­pered, and the an­gel dae­mon flew to his shoul­der as a brighteyed small bird with red wings. “Keep close to me, and watch that mon­key.”

“Then look to your right,” said Balthamos terse­ly.

And Will saw a patch of gold­en light at the cave mouth that had a face and eyes and was watch­ing them. They were no more than twen­ty paces away. He stood still, and the gold­en mon­key turned his head to look in the cave, said some­thing, and turned back.

Will felt for the knife han­dle and walked on.

When he reached the cave, the wom­an was wait­ing for him.

She was sit­ting at her ease in the lit­tle can­vas chair, with a book on her lap, watch­ing him calm­ly. She was wear­ing trav­el­er’s clothes of kha­ki, but so well were they cut and so grace­ful was her fig­ure that they looked like the high­est of high fash­ion, and the lit­tle spray of red blos­som she’d pinned to her shirt­front looked like the most el­egant of jew­els. Her hair shone and her dark eyes glit­tered, and her bare legs gleamed gold­en in the sun­light.

She smiled. Will very near­ly smiled in re­sponse, be­cause he was so un­used to the sweet­ness and gen­tle­ness a wom­an could put in­to a smile, and it un­set­tled him.

“You’re Will,” she said in that low, in­tox­icat­ing voice.

“How do you know my name?” he said harsh­ly.

“Lyra says it in her sleep.”

“Where is she?”

“Safe.”

“I want to see her.”

“Come on, then,” she said, and got to her feet, drop­ping the book on the chair.

But then there was a flash of gold, and that vi­cious mon­key ap­peared, leap­ing up to her shoul­der. As if they sus­pect­ed some­thing, they looked all around, and sud­den­ly Mrs. Coul­ter didn’t look do­mes­tic at all.

Ama was whis­per­ing ur­gent­ly: she was afraid of the gold­en mon­key dae­mon; he liked to tear the wings off bats while they were still alive.

“Is there any­one else with her?” Will said. “No sol­diers, or any­one like that?”

Ama didn’t know. She had nev­er seen sol­diers, but peo­ple did talk about strange and fright­en­ing men, or they might be ghosts, seen on the moun­tain­sides at night… But there had al­ways been ghosts in the moun­tains, ev­ery­one knew that. So they might not have any­thing to do with the wom­an.

Well, thought Will, if Lyra’s in the cave and Mrs. Coul­ter doesn’t leave it, I’ll have to go and pay a call.

He said, “What is this drug you have? What do you have to do with it to wake her up?”

Ama ex­plained.

“And where is it now?”

In her home, she said. Hid­den away.

“All right. Wait here and don’t come near. When you see her, you mustn’t say that you know me. You’ve nev­er seen me, or the bear. When do you next bring her food?”

Half an hour be­fore sun­set, Ama’s dae­mon said.

“Bring the medicine with you then,” said Will. “I’ll meet you here.”

She watched with great un­ease as he set off along the path. Sure­ly he didn’t be­lieve what she had just told him about the mon­key dae­mon, or he wouldn’t walk so reck­less­ly up to the cave.

Ac­tu­al­ly, Will felt very ner­vous. All his sens­es seemed to be clar­ified, so that he was aware of the ti­ni­est in­sects drift­ing in the sun shafts and the rus­tle of ev­ery leaf and the move­ment of the clouds above, even though his eyes nev­er left the cave mouth.

“Balthamos,” he whis­pered, and the an­gel dae­mon flew to his shoul­der as a brighteyed small bird with red wings. “Keep close to me, and watch that mon­key.”

“Then look to your right,” said Balthamos terse­ly.

And Will saw a patch of gold­en light at the cave mouth that had a face and eyes and was watch­ing them. They were no more than twen­ty paces away. He stood still, and the gold­en mon­key turned his head to look in the cave, said some­thing, and turned back.

Will felt for the knife han­dle and walked on.

When he reached the cave, the wom­an was wait­ing for him. ?

She was sit­ting at her ease in the lit­tle can­vas chair, with a book on her lap, watch­ing him calm­ly. She was wear­ing trav­el­er’s clothes of kha­ki, but so well were they cut and so grace­ful was her fig­ure that they looked like the high­est of high fash­ion, and the lit­tle spray of red blos­som she’d pinned to her shirt­front looked like the most el­egant of jew­els. Her hair shone and her dark eyes glit­tered, and her bare legs gleamed gold­en in the sun­light.

She smiled. Will very near­ly smiled in re­sponse, be­cause he was so un­used to the sweet­ness and gen­tle­ness a wom­an could put in­to a smile, and it un­set­tled him.

“You’re Will,” she said in that low, in­tox­icat­ing voice.

“How do you know my name”‘ he said harsh­ly.

“Lyra says it in her sleep.”

“Where is she?”

“Safe.”

“I want to see her.”

“Come on, then,” she said, and got to her feet, drop­ping the book on the chair.

For the first time since com­ing in­to her pres­ence, Will looked at the mon­key dae­mon. His fur was long and lus­trous, each hair seem­ing to be made of pure gold, much fin­er than a hu­man’s, and his lit­tle face and hands were black. Will had last seen that face, con­tort­ed with hate, on the evening when he and Lyra stole the alethiome­ter back from Sir Charles La­trom in the house in Ox­ford. The mon­key had tried to tear at him with his teeth un­til Will had slashed left­right with the knife, forc­ing the dae­mon back­ward, so he could close the win­dow and shut them away in a dif­fer­ent world. Will thought that noth­ing on earth would make him turn his back on that mon­key now.

But the bird­shaped Balthamos was watch­ing close­ly, and Will stepped care­ful­ly over the floor of the cave and fol­lowed Mrs. Coul­ter to the lit­tle fig­ure ly­ing still in the shad­ows.

And there she was, his dear­est friend, asleep. So small she looked! He was amazed at how all the force and fire that was Lyra awake could look so gen­tle and mild when she was sleep­ing. At her neck Pan­ta­lai­mon lay in his pole­cat shape, his fur glis­ten­ing, and Lyra’s hair lay damp across her fore­head.

He knelt down be­side her and lift­ed the hair away. Her face was hot. Out of the cor­ner of his eye, Will saw the gold­en mon­key crouch­ing to spring, and set his hand on the knife; but Mrs. Coul­ter shook her head very slight­ly, and the mon­key re­laxed.

With­out seem­ing to, Will was mem­oriz­ing the ex­act lay­out of the cave: the shape and size of ev­ery rock, the slope of the floor, the ex­act height of the ceil­ing above the sleep­ing girl. He would need to find his way through it in the dark, and this was the on­ly chance he’d have to see it first.

“So you see, she’s quite safe,” said Mrs. Coul­ter.

“Why are you keep­ing her here? And why don’t you let her wake up?”

“Let’s sit down.”

She didn’t take the chair, but sat with him on the moss­cov­ered rocks at the en­trance to the cave. She sound­ed so kind­ly, and there was such sad wis­dom in her eyes, that Will’s mis­trust deep­ened. He felt that ev­ery word she said was a lie, ev­ery ac­tion con­cealed a threat, and ev­ery smile was a mask of de­ceit. Well, he would have to de­ceive her in turn: he’d have to make her think he was harm­less. He had suc­cess­ful­ly de­ceived ev­ery teach­er and ev­ery po­lice of­fi­cer and ev­ery so­cial work­er and ev­ery neigh­bor who had ev­er tak­en an in­ter­est in him and his home; he’d been prepar­ing for this all his life.

Right, he thought. I can deal with you.

“Would you like some­thing to drink?” said Mrs. Coul­ter. “I’ll have some, too… It’s quite safe. Look.”

She cut open some wrin­kled brown­ish fruit and pressed the cloudy juice in­to two small beakers. She sipped one and of­fered the oth­er to Will, who sipped, too, and found it fresh and sweet.

“How did you find your way here?” she said.

“It wasn’t hard to fol­low you.”

“Ev­ident­ly. Have you got Lyra’s alethiome­ter?”

“Yes,” he said, and let her work out for her­self whether or not he could read it.

“And you’ve got a knife, I un­der­stand.”

“Sir Charles told you that, did he?”

“Sir Charles? Oh, Car­lo, of course. Yes, he did. It sounds fas­ci­nat­ing. May I see it?”

“No, of course not,” he said. “Why are you keep­ing Lyra here?”

“Be­cause I love her,” she said. “I’m her moth­er. She’s in ap­palling dan­ger and I won’t let any­thing hap­pen to her.”

“Dan­ger from what?” said Will.

“Well…” she said, and set her beaker down on the ground, lean­ing for­ward so that her hair swung down on ei­ther side of her face. When she sat up again, she tucked it back be­hind her ears with both hands, and Will smelled the fra­grance of some scent she was wear­ing com­bined with the fresh smell of her body, and he felt dis­turbed.

If Mrs. Coul­ter saw his re­ac­tion, she didn’t show it. She went on: “Look, Will, I don’t know how you came to meet my daugh­ter, and I don’t know what you know al­ready, and I cer­tain­ly don’t know if I can trust you; but equal­ly, I’m tired of hav­ing to lie. So here it is: the truth.

“I found out that my daugh­ter is in dan­ger from the very peo­ple I used to be­long to, from the Church. Frankly, I think they want to kill her. So I found my­self in a dilem­ma, you see: obey the Church, or save my daugh­ter. And I was a faith­ful ser­vant of the Church, too. There was no one more zeal­ous; I gave my life to it; I served it with a pas­sion.

“But I had this daugh­ter…

“I know I didn’t look af­ter her well when she was young. She was tak­en away from me and brought up by strangers. Per­haps that made it hard for her to trust me. But when she was grow­ing up, I saw the dan­ger that she was in, and three times now I’ve tried to save her from it. I’ve had to be­come a rene­gade and hide in this re­mote place, and I thought we were safe; but now to learn that you found us so eas­ily, well, you can un­der­stand, that wor­ries me. The Church won’t be far be­hind. And they want to kill her, Will. They will not let her live.”

“Why? Why do they hate her so much?”

“Be­cause of what they think she’s go­ing to do. I don’t know what that is; I wish I did, be­cause then I could keep her even more safe. But all I know is that they hate her, and they have no mer­cy, none.”

She leaned for­ward, talk­ing ur­gent­ly and qui­et­ly and close­ly.

“Why am I telling you this?” she went on. “Can I trust you? I think I have to. I can’t es­cape any­more, there’s nowhere else to go. And if you’re a friend of Lyra’s, you might be my friend, too. And I do need friends, I do need help. Ev­ery­thing’s against me now. The Church will de­stroy me, too, as well as Lyra, if they find us. I’m alone, Will, just me in a cave with my daugh­ter, and all the forces of all the worlds are try­ing to track us down. And here you are, to show how easy it is to find us, ap­par­ent­ly. What are you go­ing to do, Will? What do you want?”

“Why are you keep­ing her asleep?” he said, stub­born­ly avoid­ing her ques­tions.

“Be­cause what would hap­pen if I let her wake? She’d run away at once. And she wouldn’t last five days.”

“But why don’t you ex­plain it to her and give her the choice?”

“Do you think she’d lis­ten? Do you think even if she lis­tened she’d be­lieve me? She doesn’t trust me. She hates me, Will. You must know that. She de­spis­es me. I, well… I don’t know how to say it… I love her so much I’ve giv­en up ev­ery­thing I had, a great ca­reer, great hap­pi­ness, po­si­tion and wealth, ev­ery­thing, to come to this cave in the moun­tains and live on dry bread and sour fruit, just so I can keep my daugh­ter alive. And if to do that I have to keep her asleep, then so be it. But I must keep her alive. Wouldn’t your moth­er do as much for you?”

Will felt a jolt of shock and rage that Mrs. Coul­ter had dared to bring his own moth­er in to sup­port her ar­gu­ment. Then the first shock was com­pli­cat­ed by the thought that his moth­er, af­ter all, had not pro­tect­ed him; he had had to pro­tect her. Did Mrs. Coul­ter love Lyra more than Elaine Par­ry loved him? But that was un­fair: his moth­er wasn’t well.

Ei­ther Mrs. Coul­ter did not know the boil of feel­in­gs that her sim­ple words had lanced, or she was mon­strous­ly clever. Her beau­ti­ful eyes watched mild­ly as Will red­dened and shift­ed un­com­fort­ably; and for a mo­ment Mrs. Coul­ter looked un­can­ni­ly like her daugh­ter.

“But what are you go­ing to do?” she said.

“Well, I’ve seen Lyra now,” Will said, “and she’s alive, that’s clear, and she’s safe, I sup­pose. That’s all I was go­ing to do. So now I’ve done it, I can go and help Lord As­riel like I was sup­posed to.”

That did sur­prise her a lit­tle, but she mas­tered it.

“You don’t mean, I thought you might help us,” she said quite calm­ly, not plead­ing but ques­tion­ing. “With the knife. I saw what you did at Sir Charles’s house. You could make it safe for us, couldn’t you? You could help us get away?”

“I’m go­ing to go now,” Will said, stand­ing up.

She held out her hand. A rue­ful smile, a shrug, and a nod as if to a skill­ful op­po­nent who’d made a good move at the chess­board: that was what her body said. He found him­self lik­ing her, be­cause she was brave, and be­cause she seemed like a more com­pli­cat­ed and rich­er and deep­er Lyra. He couldn’t help but like her.

So he shook her hand, find­ing it firm and cool and soft. She turned to the gold­en mon­key, who had been sit­ting be­hind her all the time, and a look passed be­tween them that Will couldn’t in­ter­pret.

Then she turned back with a smile.

“Good­bye,” he said.

And she said qui­et­ly, “Good­bye, Will.”

He left the cave, know­ing her eyes were fol­low­ing, and he didn’t look back once. Ama was nowhere in sight. He walked back the way he’d come, keep­ing to the path un­til he heard the sound of the wa­ter­fall ahead.

“She’s ly­ing,” he said to Iorek Byr­ni­son thir­ty min­utes lat­er. “Of course she’s ly­ing. She’d lie even if it made things worse for her­self, be­cause she just loves ly­ing too much to stop.”

“What is your plan, then?” said the bear, who was bask­ing in the sun­light, his bel­ly flat down in a patch of snow among the rocks.

Will walked up and down, won­der­ing whether he could use the trick that had worked in Ox­ford: use the knife to move in­to an­oth­er world and then go to a spot right next to where Lyra lay, cut back through in­to this world, pull her through in­to safe­ty, and then close up again. That was the ob­vi­ous thing to do: why did he hes­itate?

Balthamos knew. In his own an­gel shape, shim­mer­ing like a heat haze in the sun­light, he said, “You were fool­ish to go to her. All you want to do now is see the wom­an again.”

Iorek ut­tered a deep, qui­et growl. At first Will thought he was warn­ing Balthamos, but then with a lit­tle shock of em­bar­rass­ment he re­al­ized that the bear was agree­ing with the an­gel. The two of them had tak­en lit­tle no­tice of each oth­er un­til now, their modes of be­ing were so dif­fer­ent, but they were of one mind about this, clear­ly.

And Will scowled, but it was true. He had been cap­ti­vat­ed by Mrs. Coul­ter. All his thoughts re­ferred to her: when he thought of Lyra, it was to won­der how like her moth­er she’d be when she grew up; if he thought of the Church, it was to won­der how many of the priests and car­di­nals were un­der her spell; if he thought of his own dead fa­ther, it was to won­der whether he would have de­test­ed her or ad­mired her; and if he thought of his own moth­er…

He felt his heart gri­mace. He walked away from the bear and stood on a rock from which he could see across the whole val­ley. In the clear, cold air he could hear the dis­tant tok­tok of some­one chop­ping wood, he could hear a dull iron bell around the neck of a sheep, he could hear the rustling of the tree­tops far be­low. The ti­ni­est crevices in the moun­tains at the hori­zon were clear and sharp to his eyes, as were the vul­tures wheel­ing over some neardead crea­ture many miles away.

There was no doubt about it: Balthamos was right. The wom­an had cast a spell on him. It was pleas­ant and tempt­ing to think about those beau­ti­ful eyes and the sweet­ness of that voice, and to re­call the way her arms rose to push back that shin­ing hair…

With an ef­fort he came back to his sens­es and heard an­oth­er sound al­to­geth­er: a fardis­tant drone.

He turned this way and that to lo­cate it, and found it in the north, the very di­rec­tion he and Iorek had come from.

“Zep­pelins,” said the bear’s voice, startling Will, for he hadn’t heard the great crea­ture come near. Iorek stood be­side him, look­ing in the same di­rec­tion, and then reared up high, ful­ly twice the height of Will, his gaze in­tent.

“How many?”

“Eight of them,” said Iorek af­ter a minute, and then Will saw them, too: lit­tle specks in a line.

“Can you tell how long it will take them to get here?” Will said.

“They will be here not long af­ter night­fall.”

“So we won’t have very much dark­ness. That’s a pity.”

“What is your plan?”

“To make an open­ing and take Lyra through in­to an­oth­er world, and close it again be­fore her moth­er fol­lows. The girl has a drug to wake Lyra up, but she couldn’t ex­plain very clear­ly how to use it, so she’ll have to come in­to the cave as well. I don’t want to put her in dan­ger, though. Maybe you could dis­tract Mrs. Coul­ter while we do that.”

The bear grunt­ed and closed his eyes. Will looked around for the an­gel and saw his shape out­lined in droplets of mist in the late af­ter­noon light.

“Balthamos,” he said, “I’m go­ing back in­to the for­est now, to find a safe place to make the first open­ing. I need you to keep watch for me and tell me the mo­ment she comes near, her or that dae­mon of hers.”

Balthamos nod­ded and raised his wings to shake off the mois­ture. Then he soared up in­to the cold air and glid­ed out over the val­ley as Will be­gan to search for a world where Lyra would be safe.

In the creak­ing, thrum­ming dou­ble bulk­head of the lead­ing zep­pelin, the drag­on­flies were hatch­ing. The La­dy Salmakia bent over the split­ting co­coon of the elec­tric blue one, eas­ing the damp, filmy wings clear, tak­ing care to let her face be the first thing that im­print­ed it­self on the many­faceted eyes, sooth­ing the finestretched nerves, whis­per­ing its name to the bril­liant crea­ture, teach­ing it who it was.

In a few min­utes the Che­va­li­er Tialys would do the same to his. But for now, he was send­ing a mes­sage on the lode­stone res­ona­tor, and his at­ten­tion was ful­ly oc­cu­pied with the move­ment of the bow and his fin­gers.

He trans­mit­ted:

“To lord Roke:

“We are three hours from the es­ti­mat­ed time of ar­ri­val at the val­ley. The Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline in­tends to send a squad to the cave as soon as they land.

“It will di­vide in­to two units. The first unit will fight its way in­to the cave and kill the child, re­mov­ing her head so as to prove her death. If pos­si­ble, they will al­so cap­ture the wom­an, though if that is im­pos­si­ble, they are to kill her.

“The sec­ond unit is to cap­ture the boy alive.

“The re­main­der of the force will en­gage the gy­ropters of King Ogun­we. They es­ti­mate that the gy­ropters will ar­rive short­ly af­ter the zep­pelins. In ac­cor­dance with your or­ders, the La­dy Salmakia and I will short­ly leave the zep­pelin and fly di­rect­ly to the cave, where we shall try to de­fend the girl against the first unit and hold them at bay un­til re­in­force­ments ar­rive.

“We await your re­sponse.”

The an­swer came al­most im­me­di­ate­ly.

“To the Che­va­li­er Tialys:

“In the light of your re­port, here is a change of plan.

“In or­der to pre­vent the en­emy from killing the child, which would be the worst pos­si­ble out­come, you and the La­dy Salmakia are to co­op­er­ate with the boy. While he has the knife, he has the ini­tia­tive, so if he opens an­oth­er world and takes the girl in­to it, let him do so, and fol­low them through. Stay by their side at all times.”

The Che­va­li­er Tialys replied:

“To Lord Roke:

“Your mes­sage is heard and un­der­stood. The La­dy and I shall leave at once.”

The lit­tle spy closed the res­ona­tor and gath­ered his equip­ment to­geth­er.

“Tialys,” came a whis­per from the dark, “it’s hatch­ing. You should come now.”

He leapt up to the strut where his drag­on­fly had been strug­gling in­to the world, and eased it gen­tly free of the bro­ken co­coon. Stroking its great fierce head, he lift­ed the heavy an­ten­nae, still moist and curled, and let the crea­ture taste the fla­vor of his skin un­til it was en­tire­ly un­der his com­mand.

Salmakia was fit­ting her drag­on­fly with the har­ness she car­ried ev­ery­where: spi­der­silk reins, stir­rups of ti­ta­ni­um, a sad­dle of hum­ming­bird skin. It was al­most weight­less. Tialys did the same with his, eas­ing the straps around the in­sect’s body, tight­en­ing, ad­just­ing. It would wear the har­ness till it died.

Then he quick­ly slung the pack over his shoul­der and sliced through the oiled fab­ric of the zep­pelin’s skin. Be­side him, the La­dy had mount­ed her drag­on­fly, and now she urged it through the nar­row gap in­to the ham­mer­ing gusts. The long, frail wings trem­bled as she squeezed through, and then the joy of flight took over the crea­ture, and it plunged in­to the wind. A few sec­onds lat­er Tialys joined her in the wild air, his mount ea­ger to fight the swift­gath­er­ing dusk it­self.

The two of them whirled up­ward in the icy cur­rents, took a few mo­ments to get their bear­in­gs, and set their course for the val­ley.





The Amber Spyglass





TWELVE - THE BREAK


As dark­ness fell, this was how things stood.

In his adamant tow­er, Lord As­riel paced up and down. His at­ten­tion was fixed on the lit­tle fig­ure be­side the lode­stone res­ona­tor, and ev­ery oth­er re­port had been di­vert­ed, ev­ery part of his mind was di­rect­ed to the news that came to the small square block of stone un­der the lamp­light.

King Ogun­we sat in the cab­in of his gy­ropter, swift­ly work­ing out a plan to counter the in­ten­tions of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, which he’d just learned about from the Gal­livespi­an in his own air­craft. The nav­iga­tor was scrib­bling some fig­ures on a scrap of pa­per, which he hand­ed to the pi­lot. The es­sen­tial thing was speed: get­ting their troops on the ground first would make all the dif­fer­ence. The gy­ropters were faster than zep­pelins, but they were still some way be­hind.

In the zep­pelins of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court, the Swiss Guard were at­tend­ing to their kit. Their cross­bows were dead­ly over five hun­dred yards, and an archer could load and fire fif­teen bolts a minute. The spi­ral fins, made of horn, gave the bolt a spin and made the weapon as ac­cu­rate as a ri­fle. It was al­so, of course, silent, which might be a great ad­van­tage.

Mrs. Coul­ter lay awake in the en­trance to the cave. The gold­en mon­key was rest­less, and frus­trat­ed: the bats had left the cave with the com­ing of dark­ness, and there was noth­ing to tor­ment. He prowled about by Mrs. Coul­ter’s sleep­ing bag, scratch­ing with a lit­tle horny fin­ger at the oc­ca­sion­al glowflies that set­tled in the cave and smear­ing their lu­mi­nes­cence over the rock.

Lyra lay hot and al­most as rest­less, but deep, deep asleep, locked in­to obliv­ion by the draught her moth­er had forced down her on­ly an hour be­fore. There was a dream that had oc­cu­pied her for a long time, and now it had re­turned, and lit­tle whim­pers of pity and rage and Lyrat­ic res­olu­tion shook her breast and her throat, mak­ing Pan­ta­lai­mon grind his pole­cat teeth in sym­pa­thy.

Not far away, un­der the wind­tossed pines on the for­est path, Will and Ama were mak­ing their way to­ward the cave. Will had tried to ex­plain to Ama what he was go­ing to do, but her dae­mon could make no sense of it, and when he cut a win­dow and showed her, she was so ter­ri­fied that she near­ly faint­ed. He had to move calm­ly and speak qui­et­ly in or­der to keep her near­by, be­cause she re­fused to let him take the pow­der from her, or even to tell him how it was to be used. In the end he had to say sim­ply, “Keep very qui­et and fol­low me,” and hope that she would.

Iorek, in his ar­mor, was some­where close by, wait­ing to hold off the sol­diers from the zep­pelins so as to give Will enough time to work. What nei­ther of them knew was that Lord As­riel’s force was al­so clos­ing in: the wind from time to time brought a fardis­tant clat­ter to Iorek’s ears, but where­as he knew what zep­pelin en­gines sound­ed like, he had nev­er heard a gy­ropter, and he could make noth­ing of it.

Balthamos might have been able to tell them, but Will was trou­bled about him. Now that they’d found Lyra, the an­gel had be­gun to with­draw back in­to his grief: he was silent, dis­tract­ed, and sullen. And that, in turn, made it hard­er to talk to Ama.

As they paused on the path, Will said to the air, “Balthamos? Are you there?”

“Yes,” said the an­gel tune­less­ly.

“Balthamos, please stay with me. Stay close and warn me of any dan­ger. I need you.”

“I haven’t aban­doned you yet,” said the an­gel.

That was the best Will could get out of him.

Far above in the buf­fet­ing midair, Tialys and Salmakia soared over the val­ley, try­ing to see down to the cave. The drag­on­flies would do ex­act­ly as they were told, but their bod­ies couldn’t eas­ily cope with cold, and be­sides, they were tossed about dan­ger­ous­ly in the wild wind. Their rid­ers guid­ed them low, among the shel­ter of the trees, and then flew from branch to branch, tak­ing their bear­in­gs in the gath­er­ing dark.

Will and Ama crept up in the windy moon­light to the clos­est point they could reach that was still out of sight of the cave mouth. It hap­pened to be be­hind a heavyleaved bush just off the path, and there he cut a win­dow in the air.

The on­ly world he could find with the same con­for­ma­tion of ground was a bare, rocky place, where the moon glared down from a star­ry sky on­to a bleached bonewhite ground where lit­tle in­sects crawled and ut­tered their scrap­ing, chit­ter­ing sounds over a wide si­lence.

Ama fol­lowed him through, fin­gers and thumbs mov­ing fu­ri­ous­ly to pro­tect her from the dev­ils that must be haunt­ing this ghast­ly place; and her dae­mon, adapt­ing at once, be­came a lizard and scam­pered over the rocks with quick feet.

Will saw a prob­lem. It was sim­ply that the bril­liant moon­light on the bonecol­ored rocks would shine like a lantern once he opened the win­dow in Mrs. Coul­ter’s cave. He’d have to open it quick­ly, pull Lyra through, and close it again at once. They could wake her up in this world, where it was safer.

He stopped on the daz­zling slope and said to Ama: “We must be very quick and com­plete­ly silent. No noise, not even a whis­per.”

She un­der­stood, though she was fright­ened. The lit­tle pack­et of pow­der was in her breast pock­et: she’d checked it a dozen times, and she and her dae­mon had re­hearsed the task so of­ten that she was sure they could do it in to­tal dark­ness.

They climbed on up the bonewhite rocks, Will mea­sur­ing the dis­tance care­ful­ly un­til he es­ti­mat­ed that they would be well in­side the cave.

Then he took the knife and cut the small­est pos­si­ble win­dow he could see through, no larg­er than the cir­cle he could make with thumb and fore­fin­ger.

He put his eye to it quick­ly to keep the moon­light out and looked through. There it all was: he’d cal­cu­lat­ed well. He could see the cave mouth ahead, the rocks dark against the night sky; he could see the shape of Mrs. Coul­ter, asleep, with her gold­en dae­mon be­side her; he could even see the mon­key’s tail, trail­ing neg­li­gent­ly over the sleep­ing bag.

Chang­ing his an­gle and look­ing clos­er, he saw the rock be­hind which Lyra was ly­ing. He couldn’t see her, though. Was he too close? He shut that win­dow, moved back a step or two, and opened again.

She wasn’t there.

“Lis­ten,” he said to Ama and her dae­mon, “the wom­an has moved her and I can’t see where she is. I’m go­ing to have to go through and look around the cave to find her, and cut through as soon as I’ve done that. So stand back, keep out of the way so I don’t ac­ci­den­tal­ly cut you when I come back. If I get stuck there for any rea­son, go back and wait by the oth­er win­dow, where we came in.”

“We should both go through,” Ama said, “be­cause I know how to wake her, and you don’t, and I know the cave bet­ter than you do, too.”

Her face was stub­born, her lips pressed to­geth­er, her fists clenched. Her lizard dae­mon ac­quired a ruff and raised it slow­ly around his neck.

Will said, “Oh, very well. But we go through quick­ly and in com­plete si­lence, and you do ex­act­ly what I say, at once, you un­der­stand?”

She nod­ded and pat­ted her pock­et yet again to check the medicine.

Will made a small open­ing, low down, looked through, and en­larged it swift­ly, get­ting through in a mo­ment on hands and knees. Ama was right be­hind him, and al­to­geth­er the win­dow was open for less than ten sec­onds.

They crouched on the cave floor be­hind a large rock, with the bird­formed Balthamos be­side them, their eyes tak­ing some mo­ments to ad­just from the moon­drenched bril­liance of the oth­er world. In­side the cave it was much dark­er, and much more full of sound: most­ly the wind in the trees, but be­low that was an­oth­er sound, too. It was the roar of a zep­pelin’s en­gine, and it wasn’t far away.

With the knife in his right hand, Will bal­an­ced him­self care­ful­ly and looked around.

Ama was do­ing the same, and her owleyed dae­mon was peer­ing this way and that; but Lyra was not at this end of the cave. There was no doubt about it.

Will raised his head over the rock and took a long, steady look down to­ward the en­trance, where Mrs. Coul­ter and her dae­mon lay deep in sleep.

And then his heart sank. There lay Lyra, stretched out in the depths of her sleep, right next to Mrs. Coul­ter. Their out­lines had merged in the dark­ness; no won­der he hadn’t seen her.

Will touched An­na’s hand and point­ed.

“We’ll just have to do it very care­ful­ly,” he whis­pered.

Some­thing was hap­pen­ing out­side. The roar of the zep­pelins was now much loud­er than the wind in the trees, and lights were mov­ing about, too, shin­ing down through the branch­es from above. The quick­er they got Lyra out, the bet­ter, and that meant dart­ing down there now be­fore Mrs. Coul­ter woke up, cut­ting through, pulling her to safe­ty, and clos­ing again.

He whis­pered that to Ama. She nod­ded.

Then, as he was about to move, Mrs. Coul­ter woke up.

She stirred and said some­thing, and in­stant­ly the gold­en mon­key sprang to his feet. Will could see his sil­hou­ette in the cave mouth, crouch­ing, at­ten­tive, and then Mrs. Coul­ter her­self sat up, shad­ing her eyes against the light out­side.

Will’s left hand was tight around Ama’s wrist. Mrs. Coul­ter got up, ful­ly dressed, lithe, alert, not at all as if she’d just been asleep. Per­haps she’d been awake all the time. She and the gold­en mon­key were crouch­ing in­side the cave mouth, watch­ing and lis­ten­ing, as the light from the zep­pelins swung from side to side above the tree­tops and the en­gines roared, and shouts, male voic­es warn­ing or call­ing or­ders, made it clear that they should move fast, very fast.

Will squeezed Ama’s wrist and dart­ed for­ward, watch­ing the ground in case he stum­bled, run­ning fast and low.

Then he was at Lyra’s side, and she was deep asleep, Pan­ta­lai­mon around her neck; and then Will held up the knife and felt care­ful­ly, and a sec­ond lat­er there would have been an open­ing to pull Lyra through in­to safe­ty…

But he looked up. He looked at Mrs. Coul­ter. She had turned around silent­ly, and the glare from the sky, re­flect­ed off the damp cave wall, hit her face, and for a mo­ment it wasn’t her face at all; it was his own moth­er’s face, re­proach­ing him, and his heart quailed from sor­row; and then as he thrust with the knife, his mind left the point, and with a wrench and a crack, the knife fell in pieces to the ground.

It was bro­ken.

Now he couldn’t cut his way out at all.

He said to Ama, “Wake her up. Do it now.”

Then he stood up, ready to fight. He’d stran­gle that mon­key first. He was tensed to meet its leap, and he found he still had the hilt of the knife in his hand; at least he could use it to hit with.

But there was no at­tack ei­ther from the gold­en mon­key or from Mrs. Coul­ter. She sim­ply moved a lit­tle to let the light from out­side show the pis­tol in her hand. In do­ing so, she let some of the light shine on what Ama was do­ing: she was sprin­kling a pow­der on Lyra’s up­per lip and watch­ing as Lyra breathed in, help­ing it in­to her nos­trils by us­ing her own dae­mon’s tail as a brush.

Will heard a change in the sounds from out­side: there was an­oth­er note now as well as the roar of the zep­pelins. It sound­ed fa­mil­iar, like an in­tru­sion from his own world, and then he rec­og­nized the clat­ter of a he­li­copter. Then there was an­oth­er and an­oth­er, and more lights swept across the ev­er­mov­ing trees out­side, in a bril­liant green scat­ter of ra­di­an­ce.

Mrs. Coul­ter turned briefly as the new sound came to her, but too briefly for Will to jump and seize the gun. As for the mon­key dae­mon, he glared at Will with­out blink­ing, crouched ready to spring.

Lyra was mov­ing and mur­mur­ing. Will bent down and squeezed her hand, and the oth­er dae­mon nudged Pan­ta­lai­mon, lift­ing his heavy head, whis­per­ing to him.

Out­side there was a shout, and a man fell out of the sky, to land with a sick­en­ing crash not five yards from the en­trance to the cave. Mrs. Coul­ter didn’t flinch; she looked at him cool­ly and turned back to Will. A mo­ment lat­er there came a crack of ri­fle fire from above, and a sec­ond af­ter that, a storm of shoot­ing broke out, and the sky was full of ex­plo­sions, of the crack­le of flame, of bursts of gun­fire.

Lyra was strug­gling up in­to con­scious­ness, gasp­ing, sigh­ing, moan­ing, push­ing her­self up on­ly to fall back weak­ly, and Pan­ta­lai­mon was yawn­ing, stretch­ing, snap­ping at the oth­er dae­mon, flop­ping clum­si­ly to one side as his mus­cles failed to act.

As for Will, he was search­ing the cave floor with the ut­most care for the pieces of the bro­ken knife. No time to won­der how it had hap­pened, or whether it could be mend­ed; but he was the knife bear­er, and he had to gath­er it up safe­ly. As he found each piece, he lift­ed it care­ful­ly, ev­ery nerve in his body aware of his miss­ing fin­gers, and slipped it in­to the sheath. He could see the pieces quite eas­ily, be­cause the met­al caught the gleam from out­side: sev­en of them, the small­est be­ing the point it­self. He picked them all up and then turned back to try and make sense of the fight out­side.

Some­where above the trees, the zep­pelins were hov­er­ing, and men were slid­ing down ropes, but the wind made it dif­fi­cult for the pi­lots to hold the air­craft steady. Mean­while, the first gy­ropters had ar­rived above the cliff. There was on­ly room for them to land one at a time, and then the African ri­fle­men had to make their way down the rock face. It was one of them who had been picked off by a lucky shot from the sway­ing zep­pelins.

By this time, both sides had land­ed some troops. Some had been killed be­tween the sky and the ground; sev­er­al more were wound­ed and lay on the cliff or among the trees. But nei­ther force had yet reached the cave, and still the pow­er in­side it lay with Mrs. Coul­ter.

Will said above the noise:

“What are you go­ing to do?”

“Hold you cap­tive.”

“What, as hostages? Why should they take any no­tice of that? They want to kill us all any­way.”

“One force does, cer­tain­ly,” she said, “but I’m not sure about the oth­er. We must hope the Africans win.”

She sound­ed hap­py, and in the glare from out­side, Will saw her face full of joy and life and en­er­gy.

“You broke the knife,” he said.

“No, I didn’t. I want­ed it whole, so we could get away. You were the one who broke it.”

Lyra’s voice came ur­gent­ly: “Will?” she mut­tered. “Is that Will?”

“Lyra!” he said, and knelt quick­ly be­side her. Ama was help­ing her sit up.

“What’s hap­pen­ing?” Lyra said. “Where are we? Oh, Will, I had this dream…”

“We’re in a cave. Don’t move too fast, you’ll get dizzy. Just take it care­ful­ly. Find your strength. You’ve been asleep for days and days.”

Her eyes were still heavy, and she was racked by deep yawns, but she was des­per­ate to be awake, and he helped her up, putting her arm over his shoul­der and tak­ing much of her weight. Ama watched timid­ly, for now that the strange girl was awake, she was ner­vous of her. Will breathed in the scent of Lyra’s sleepy body with a hap­py sat­is­fac­tion: she was here, she was re­al.

They sat on a rock. Lyra held his hand and rubbed her eyes.

“What’s hap­pen­ing, Will?” she whis­pered.

“Ama here got some pow­der to wake you up,” he said, speak­ing very qui­et­ly, and Lyra turned to the girl, see­ing her for the first time, and put her hand on Ama’s shoul­der in thanks. “I got here as soon as I could,” Will went on, “but some sol­diers did, too. I don’t know who they are. We’ll get out as soon as we can.”

Out­side, the noise and con­fu­sion were reach­ing a height; one of the gy­ropters had tak­en a fusil­lade from a zep­pelin’s ma­chine gun while the ri­fle­men were jump­ing out on the cliff top, and it burst in­to flames, not on­ly killing the crew but al­so pre­vent­ing the re­main­ing gy­ropters from land­ing.

An­oth­er zep­pelin, mean­while, had found a clear space far­ther down the val­ley, and the cross­bow men who dis­em­barked from it were now run­ning up the path to re­in­force those al­ready in ac­tion. Mrs. Coul­ter was fol­low­ing as much as she could see from the cave mouth, and now she raised her pis­tol, sup­port­ing it with both hands, and took care­ful aim be­fore fir­ing. Will saw the flash from the muz­zle, but heard noth­ing over the ex­plo­sions and gun­fire from out­side.

If she does that again, he thought, I’ll rush and knock her over, and he turned to whis­per that to Balthamos; but the an­gel was nowhere near. In­stead, Will saw with dis­may, he was cow­er­ing against the wall of the cave, back in his an­gel form, trem­bling and whim­per­ing.

“Balthamos!” Will said ur­gent­ly. “Come on, they can’t hurt you! And you have to help us! You can fight, you know that, you’re not a cow­ard, and we need you…

But be­fore the an­gel could re­ply, some­thing else hap­pened.

Mrs. Coul­ter cried out and reached down to her an­kle, and si­mul­ta­ne­ous­ly the gold­en mon­key snatched at some­thing in midair, with a snarl of glee.

A voice, a wom­an’s voice, but some­how minute, came from the thing in the mon­key’s paw:

“Tialys! Tialys!”

It was a tiny wom­an, no big­ger than Lyra’s hand, and the mon­key was al­ready pulling and pulling at one of her arms so that she cried out in pain. Ama knew he wouldn’t stop till he’d torn it off, but Will leapt for­ward as he saw the pis­tol fall from Mrs. Coul­ter’s hand.

And he caught the gun, but then Mrs. Coul­ter fell still, and Will be­came aware of a strange stale­mate.

The gold­en mon­key and Mrs. Coul­ter were both ut­ter­ly mo­tion­less. Her face was dis­tort­ed with pain and fury, but she dared not move, be­cause stand­ing on her shoul­der was a tiny man with his heel pressed against her neck, his hands en­twined in her hair; and Will, through his as­ton­ish­ment, saw on that heel a glis­ten­ing horny spur and knew what had caused her to cry out a mo­ment be­fore. He must have stung her an­kle.

But the lit­tle man couldn’t hurt Mrs. Coul­ter any­more, be­cause of the dan­ger his part­ner was in at the hands of the mon­key; and the mon­key couldn’t harm her, in case the lit­tle man dug his poi­son spur in­to Mrs. Coul­ter’s jugu­lar vein. None of them could move.

Breath­ing deeply and sw­al­low­ing hard to gov­ern the pain, Mrs. Coul­ter turned her tear­dashed eyes to Will and said calm­ly, “So, Mas­ter Will, what do you think we should do now?”





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTEEN - TIALYS AND SALMAKIA


Hold­ing the heavy gun, Will swept his hand side­ways and knocked the gold­en mon­key off his perch, stun­ning him so that Mrs. Coul­ter groaned aloud and the mon­key’s paw re­laxed enough to let the tiny wom­an strug­gle free.

In a mo­ment she leapt up to the rocks, and the man sprang away from Mrs. Coul­ter, both of them mov­ing as quick­ly as grasshop­pers. The three chil­dren had no time to be as­ton­ished. The man was con­cerned: he felt his com­pan­ion’s shoul­der and arm ten­der­ly, and em­braced her swift­ly be­fore call­ing to Will.

“You! Boy!” he said, and al­though his voice was small in vol­ume, it was as deep as a grown man’s. “Have you got the knife?”

“Of course I have,” said Will. If they didn’t know it was bro­ken, he wasn’t go­ing to tell them.

“You and the girl will have to fol­low us. Who is the oth­er child?”

“Ama, from the vil­lage,” said Will.

“Tell her to re­turn there. Move now, be­fore the Swiss come.”

Will didn’t hes­itate. What­ev­er these two in­tend­ed, he and Lyra could still get away through the win­dow he’d opened be­hind the bush on the path be­low.

So he helped her up and watched cu­ri­ous­ly as the two small fig­ures leapt on, what? Birds? No, drag­on­flies, as large as seag­ulls, which had been wait­ing in the dark­ness. Then they dart­ed for­ward to the cave mouth, where Mrs. Coul­ter lay. She was half­stunned with pain and drowsy from the Che­va­li­er’s sting, but she reached up as they went past her, and cried:

“Lyra! Lyra, my daugh­ter, my dear one! Lyra, don’t go! Don’t go!”

Lyra looked down at her, an­guished; but then she stepped over her moth­er’s body and loos­ened Mrs. Coul­ter’s fee­ble clutch from her an­kle. The wom­an was sob­bing now; Will saw the tears glis­ten­ing on her cheeks.

Crouch­ing just be­side the cave mouth, the three chil­dren wait­ed un­til there was a brief pause in the shoot­ing, and then fol­lowed the drag­on­flies as they dart­ed down the path. The light had changed: as well as the cold an­bar­ic gleam from the zep­pelins’ flood­lights, there was the leap­ing or­ange of flames.

Will looked back once. In the glare Mrs. Coul­ter’s face was a mask of trag­ic pas­sion, and her dae­mon clung piteous­ly to her as she knelt and held out her arms, cry­ing:

“Lyra! Lyra, my love! My heart’s trea­sure, my lit­tle child, my on­ly one! Oh, Lyra, Lyra, don’t go, don’t leave me! My dar­ling daugh­ter, you’re tear­ing my heart…

And a great and fu­ri­ous sob shook Lyra her­self, for, af­ter all, Mrs. Coul­ter was the on­ly moth­er she would ev­er have, and Will saw a cas­cade of tears run down the girl’s cheeks.

But he had to be ruth­less. He pulled at Lyra’s hand, and as the drag­on­fly rid­er dart­ed close to his head, urg­ing them to hur­ry, he led her at a crouch­ing run down the path and away from the cave. In Will’s left hand, bleed­ing again from the blow he’d land­ed on the mon­key, was Mrs. Coul­ter’s pis­tol.

“Make for the top of the cliff,” said the drag­on­fly rid­er, “and give your­self up to the Africans. They’re your best hope.”

Mind­ful of those sharp spurs, Will said noth­ing, though he hadn’t the least in­ten­tion of obey­ing. There was on­ly one place he was mak­ing for, and that was the win­dow be­hind the bush; so he kept his head low and ran fast, and Lyra and Ama ran be­hind him.

“Halt!”

There was a man, three men, block­ing the path ahead, uni­formed, white men with cross­bows and snarling wolf­dog dae­mons, the Swiss Guard.

“Iorek!” cried Will at once. “Iorek Byr­ni­son!” He could hear the bear crash­ing and snarling not far away, and hear the screams and cries of the sol­diers un­lucky enough to meet him.

But some­one else came from nowhere to help them: Balthamos, in a blur of des­per­ation, hurled him­self be­tween the chil­dren and the sol­diers. The men fell back, amazed, as this ap­pari­tion shim­mered in­to be­ing in front of them.

But they were trained war­ri­ors, and a mo­ment lat­er their dae­mons leapt at the an­gel, sav­age teeth flash­ing white in the gloom, and Balthamos flinched: he cried out in fear and shame, and shrank back. Then he sprang up­ward, beat­ing his wings hard. Will watched in dis­may as the fig­ure of his guide and friend soared up to van­ish out of sight among the tree­tops.

Lyra was fol­low­ing it all with still­dazed eyes. It had tak­en no more than two or three sec­onds, but it was enough for the Swiss to re­group, and now their lead­er was rais­ing his cross­bow, and Will had no choice: he swung up the pis­tol and clamped his right hand to the butt and pulled the trig­ger, and the blast shook his bones, but the bul­let found the man’s heart.

The sol­di­er fell back as if he’d been kicked by a horse. Si­mul­ta­ne­ous­ly the two lit­tle spies launched them­selves at the oth­er two, leap­ing from the drag­on­flies at their vic­tims be­fore Will could blink. The wom­an found a neck, the man a wrist, and each made a quick back­ward stab with a heel. A chok­ing, an­guished gasp, and the two Swiss died, their dae­mons van­ish­ing in mid­howl.

Will leapt over the bod­ies, and Lyra went with him, run­ning hard and fast with Pan­ta­lai­mon rac­ing wild­cat­formed at their heels. Where’s Ama? Will thought, and he saw her in the same mo­ment dodg­ing down a dif­fer­ent path. Now she’ll be safe, he thought, and a sec­ond lat­er he saw the pale gleam of the win­dow deep be­hind the bush­es. He seized Lyra’s arm and pulled her to­ward it. Their faces were scratched, their clothes were snagged, their an­kles twist­ed on roots and rocks, but they found the win­dow and tum­bled through, in­to the oth­er world, on­to the bonewhite rocks un­der the glar­ing moon, where on­ly the scrap­ing of the in­sects broke the im­mense si­lence.

And the first thing Will did was to hold his stom­ach and retch, heav­ing and heav­ing with a mor­tal hor­ror. That was two men now that he’d killed, not to men­tion the youth in the Tow­er of the An­gels… Will did not want this. His body re­volt­ed at what his in­stinct had made him do, and the re­sult was a dry, sour, ag­oniz­ing spell of kneel­ing and vom­it­ing un­til his stom­ach and his heart were emp­ty.

Lyra watched help­less near­by, nurs­ing Pan, rock­ing him against her breast.

Will fi­nal­ly re­cov­ered a lit­tle and looked around. And at once he saw that they weren’t alone in this world, be­cause the lit­tle spies were there, too, with their packs laid on the ground near­by. Their drag­on­flies were skim­ming over the rocks, snap­ping up moths. The man was mas­sag­ing the shoul­der of the wom­an, and both of them looked at the chil­dren stern­ly. Their eyes were so bright and their fea­tures so dis­tinct that there was no doubt about their feel­in­gs, and Will knew they were a formidable pair, who­ev­er they were.

He said to Lyra, “The alethiome­ter’s in my ruck­sack, there.”

“Oh, Will, I did so hope you’d find it, what­ev­er hap­pened. Did you find your fa­ther? And my dream, Will, it’s too much to be­lieve, what we got to do, oh, I daren’t even think of it… And it’s safe! You brung it all this way safe for me…”

The words tum­bled out of her so ur­gent­ly that even she didn’t ex­pect an­swers. She turned the alethiome­ter over and over, her fin­gers stroking the heavy gold and the smooth crys­tal and the knurled wheels they knew so well.

Will thought: It’ll tell us how to mend the knife!

But he said first, “Are you all right? Are you hun­gry or thirsty?”

“I dun­no… yeah. But not too much. Any­way…

“We should move away from this win­dow,” Will said, “just in case they find it and come through.”

“Yes, that’s true,” she said, and they moved up the slope, t, Will car­ry­ing his ruck­sack and Lyra hap­pi­ly car­ry­ing the lit­tle bag she kept the alethiome­ter in. Out of the cor­ner of his eye, Will saw the two small spies fol­low­ing, but they kept their dis­tance and made no threat.

Over the brow of the rise there was a ledge of rock that of­fered a nar­row shel­ter, and they sat be­neath it, hav­ing care­ful­ly checked it for snakes, and shared some dried fruit and some wa­ter from Will’s bot­tle.

Will said qui­et­ly, “The knife’s bro­ken. I don’t know how it hap­pened. Mrs. Coul­ter did some­thing, or said some­thing, and I thought of my moth­er and that made the knife twist, or catch, or, I don’t know what hap­pened. But we’re stuck till we can get it mend­ed. I didn’t want those two lit­tle peo­ple to know, be­cause while they think I can still use it, I’ve got the up­per hand. I thought you could ask the alethiome­ter, maybe, and…

“Yeah!” she said at once. “Yeah, I will.”

She had the gold­en in­stru­ment out in a mo­ment and moved in­to the moon­light so she could see the di­al clear­ly. Loop­ing back the hair be­hind her ears, just as Will had seen her moth­er do, she be­gan to turn the wheels in the old fa­mil­iar way, and Pan­ta­lai­mon, mouse­formed now, sat on her knee.

She had hard­ly start­ed be­fore she gave a lit­tle gasp of ex­cite­ment, and she looked up at Will with shin­ing eyes as the nee­dle swung. But it hadn’t fin­ished yet, and she looked back, frown­ing, un­til the in­stru­ment fell still.

She put it away, say­ing, “Iorek? Is he near­by, Will? I thought I heard you call him, but then I thought I was just wish­ing. Is he re­al­ty?”

“Yes. Could he mend the knife? Is that what the alethiome­ter said?”

“Oh, he can do any­thing with met­al, Will! Not on­ly ar­mor, he can make lit­tle del­icate things as well…” She told him about the small tin box Iorek had made for her to shut the spyfly in. “But where is he?”

“Close by. He would have come when I called, but ob­vi­ous­ly he was fight­ing… And Balthamos! Oh, he must have been so fright­ened…”

“Who?”

He ex­plained briefly, feel­ing his cheeks warm with the shame that the an­gel must be feel­ing.

“But I’ll tell you more about him lat­er,” he said. “It’s so strange… He told me so many things, and I think I un­der­stand them, too…” He ran his hands through his hair and rubbed his eyes.

“You got to tell me ev­ery­thing,” she said firm­ly. “Ev­ery­thing you did since she caught me. Oh, Will, you en’t still bleed­ing? Your poor hand…”

“No. My fa­ther cured it. I just opened it up when I hit the gold­en mon­key, but it’s bet­ter now. He gave me some oint­ment that he’d made…

“You found your fa­ther?”

“That’s right, on the moun­tain, that night…”

He let her clean his wound and put on some fresh oint­ment from the lit­tle horn box while he told her some of what had hap­pened: the fight with the stranger, the rev­ela­tion that came to them both a sec­ond be­fore the witch’s ar­row struck home, his meet­ing with the an­gels, his jour­ney to the cave, and his meet­ing with Iorek.

“All that hap­pen­ing, and I was asleep,” she mar­veled. “D’you know, I think she was kind to me, Will, I think she was, I don’t think she ev­er want­ed to hurt me…She did such bad things, but…”

She rubbed her eyes.

“Oh, but my dream, Will, I can’t tell you how strange it was! It was like when I read the alethiome­ter, all that clear­ness and un­der­stand­ing go­ing so deep you can’t see the bot­tom, but clear all the way down.

“It was… Re­mem­ber I told you about my friend Roger, and how the Gob­blers caught him and I tried to res­cue him, and it went wrong and Lord As­riel killed him?

“Well, I saw him. In my dream I saw him again, on­ly he was dead, he was a ghost, and he was, like, beck­on­ing to me, call­ing to me, on­ly I couldn’t hear. He didn’t want me to be dead, it wasn’t that. He want­ed to speak to me.

“And… It was me that took him there, to Sval­bard, where he got killed, it was my fault he was dead. And I thought back to when we used to play in Jor­dan Col­lege, Roger and me, on the roof, all through the town, in the mar­kets and by the riv­er and down the Claybeds… Me and Roger and all the oth­ers… And I went to Bolvan­gar to fetch him safe home, on­ly I made it worse, and if I don’t say sor­ry, it’ll all be no good, just a huge waste of time. I got to do that, you see, Will. I got to go down in­to the land of the dead and find him, and…and say sor­ry. I don’t care what hap­pens af­ter that. Then we can… I can … It doesn’t mat­ter af­ter that.”

Will said, “This place where the dead are. Is it a world like this one, like mine or yours or any of the oth­ers? Is it a world I could get to with the knife?”

She looked at him, struck by the idea.

“You could ask,” he went on. “Do it now. Ask where it is, and how we get there.”

She bent over the alethiome­ter and her fin­gers moved swift­ly. A minute lat­er she had the an­swer.

“Yes,” she said, “but it’s a strange place, Will…So strange … Could we re­al­ly do that? Could we re­al­ly go to the land of the dead? But, what part of us does that? Be­cause dae­mons fade away when we die, I’ve seen them, and our bod­ies, well, they just stay in the grave and de­cay, don’t they?”

“Then there must be a third part. A dif­fer­ent part.”

“You know,” she said, full of ex­cite­ment, “I think that must be true! Be­cause I can think about my body and I can think about my dae­mon, so there must be an­oth­er part, to do the think­ing!”

“Yes. And that’s the ghost.”

Lyra’s eyes blazed. She said, “Maybe we could get Roger’s ghost out. Maybe we could res­cue him.”

“Maybe. We could try.”

“Yeah, we’ll do it!” she said at once. “We’ll go to­geth­er! That’s ex­act­ly what we’ll do!”

But if they didn’t get the knife mend­ed, Will thought, they’d be able to do noth­ing at all.

As soon as his head cleared and his stom­ach felt calmer, he sat up and called to the lit­tle spies. They were busy with some minute ap­pa­ra­tus near­by.

“Who are you?” he said. “And whose side are you on?”

The man fin­ished what he was do­ing and shut a wood­en box, like a vi­olin case no longer than a wal­nut. The wom­an spoke first.

“We are Gal­livespi­an,” she said. “I am the La­dy Salmakia, and my com­pan­ion is the Che­va­li­er Tialys. We are spies for Lord As­riel.”

She was stand­ing on a rock three or four paces away from Will and Lyra, dis­tinct and bril­liant in the moon­light. Her lit­tle voice was per­fect­ly clear and low, her ex­pres­sion con­fi­dent. She wore a loose skirt of some sil­ver ma­te­ri­al and a sleeve­less top of green, and her spurred feet were bare, like the man’s. His cos­tume was sim­ilar­ly col­ored, but his sleeves were long and his wide trousers reached to mid­calf. Both of them looked strong, ca­pa­ble, ruth­less, and proud.

“What world do you come from?” said Lyra. “I nev­er seen peo­ple like you be­fore.”

“Our world has the same prob­lems as yours,” said Tialys. “We are out­laws. Our lead­er, Lord Roke, heard of Lord As­riel’s re­volt and pledged our sup­port.”

“And what did you want to do with me?”

“To take you to your fa­ther,” said the La­dy Salmakia. “Lord As­riel sent a force un­der King Ogun­we to res­cue you and the boy and bring you both to his fortress. We are here to help.”

“Ah, but sup­pose I don’t want to go to my fa­ther? Sup­pose I don’t trust him?”

“I’m sor­ry to hear that,” she said, “but those are our or­ders: to take you to him.”

Lyra couldn’t help it: she laughed out loud at the no­tion of these tiny peo­ple mak­ing her do any­thing. But it was a mis­take. Mov­ing sud­den­ly, the wom­an seized Pan­ta­lai­mon, and hold­ing his mouse body in a fierce grip, she touched the tip of a spur to his leg. Lyra gasped: it was like the shock when the men at Bolvan­gar had seized him. No one should touch some­one else’s dae­mon, it was a vi­ola­tion.

But then she saw that Will had swept up the man in his right hand, hold­ing him tight­ly around the legs so he couldn’t use his spurs, and was hold­ing him high.

“Stale­mate again,” said the La­dy calm­ly. “Put the Che­va­li­er down, boy.”

“Let go of Lyra’s dae­mon first,” said Will. “I’m not in the mood to ar­gue.”

Lyra saw with a cold thrill that Will was per­fect­ly ready to dash the Gal­livespi­an’s head against the rock. And both lit­tle peo­ple knew it.

Salmakia lift­ed her foot away from Pan­ta­lai­mon’s leg, and at once he fought free of her grasp and changed in­to a wild­cat, hiss­ing fe­ro­cious­ly, fur on end, tail lash­ing. His bared teeth were a hand’s breadth from the La­dy’s face, and she gazed at him with per­fect com­po­sure. Af­ter a mo­ment he turned and fled to Lyra’s breast, er­mi­ne­shaped, and Will care­ful­ly placed Tialys back on the rock be­side his part­ner.

“You should show some re­spect,” the Che­va­li­er said to Lyra. “You are a thought­less, in­so­lent child, and sev­er­al brave men have died this evening in or­der to make you safe. You’d do bet­ter to act po­lite­ly.”

“Yes,” she said humbly, “I’m sor­ry, I will. Hon­est.”

“As for you… he went on, turn­ing to Will.

But Will in­ter­rupt­ed: “As for me, I’m not go­ing to be spo­ken to like that, so don’t try. Re­spect goes two ways. Now lis­ten care­ful­ly. You are not in charge here; we are. If you want to stay and help, then you do as we say. Oth­er­wise, go back to Lord As­riel now. There’s no ar­gu­ing about it.”

Lyra could see the pair of them bristling, but Tialys was look­ing at Will’s hand, which was on the sheath at his belt, and she knew he was think­ing that while Will had the knife, he was stronger than they were. At all costs they mustn’t know it was bro­ken, then.

“Very well,” said the Che­va­li­er. “We shall help you, be­cause that’s the task we’ve been giv­en. But you must let us know what you in­tend to do.”

“That’s fair,” said Will. “I’ll tell you. We’re go­ing back in­to Lyra’s world as soon as we’ve rest­ed, and we’re go­ing to find a friend of ours, a bear. He’s not far away.”

“The bear with the ar­mor? Very well,” said Salmakia. “We saw him fight. We’ll help you do that. But then you must come with us to Lord As­riel.”

“Yes,” said Lyra, ly­ing earnest­ly, “oh yes, we’ll do that then all right.”

Pan­ta­lai­mon was calmer now, and cu­ri­ous, so she let him climb to her shoul­der and change. He be­came a drag­on­fly, as big as the two that were skim­ming through the air as they spoke, and dart­ed up to join them.

“That poi­son,” Lyra said, turn­ing back to the Gal­livespi­ans, “in your spurs, I mean, is it dead­ly? Be­cause you stung my moth­er, Mrs. Coul­ter, didn’t you? Will she die?”

“It was on­ly a light sting,” said Tialys. “A full dose would have killed her, yes, but a small scratch will make her weak and drowsy for half a day or so.”

And full of mad­den­ing pain, he knew, but he didn’t tell her that.

“I need to talk to Lyra in pri­vate,” said Will. “We’re just go­ing to move away for a minute.”

“With that knife,” said the Che­va­li­er, “you can cut through from one world to an­oth­er, isn’t that so?”

“Don’t you trust me?”

“No.”

“All right, I’ll leave it here, then. If I haven’t got it, I can’t use it.”

He un­buck­led the sheath and laid it on the rock, and then he and Lyra walked away and sat where they could see the Gal­livespi­ans. Tialys was look­ing close­ly at the knife han­dle, but he wasn’t touch­ing it,

“We’ll just have to put up with them,” Will said. “As soon as the knife’s mend­ed, we’ll es­cape.”

“They’re so quick, Will,” she said. “And they wouldn’t care, they’d kill you.”

“I just hope Iorek can mend it. I hadn’t re­al­ized how much we need it.”

“He will,” she said con­fi­dent­ly.

She was watch­ing Pan­ta­lai­mon as he skimmed and dart­ed through the air, snap­ping up tiny moths like the oth­er drag­on­flies. He couldn’t go as far as they could, but he was just as fast, and even more bright­ly pat­terned. She raised her hand and he set­tled on it, his long, trans­par­ent wings vi­brat­ing.

“Do you think we can trust them while we sleep?” Will said.

“Yes. They’re fierce, but I think they’re hon­est.”

They went back to the rock, and Will said to the Gal­livespi­ans, “I’m go­ing to sleep now. We’ll move on in the morn­ing.”

The Che­va­li­er nod­ded, and Will curled up at once and fell asleep.

Lyra sat down be­side him, with Pan­ta­lai­mon cat­formed and warm in her lap. How lucky Will was that she was awake now to look af­ter him! He was tru­ly fear­less, and she ad­mired that be­yond mea­sure; but he wasn’t good at ly­ing and be­tray­ing and cheat­ing, which all came to her as nat­ural­ly as breath­ing. When she thought of that, she felt warm and vir­tu­ous, be­cause she did it for Will, nev­er for her­self.

She had in­tend­ed to look at the alethiome­ter again, but to her deep sur­prise she found her­self as weary as if she’d been awake all that time in­stead of un­con­scious, and she lay down close by and closed her eyes, just for a brief nap, as she as­sured her­self be­fore she fell asleep.





The Amber Spyglass





FOURTEEN - KNOW WHAT IT IS


Will and Lyra slept through the night and woke up when the sun struck their eye­lids. They ac­tu­al­ly awoke with­in sec­onds of each oth­er, with the same thought; but when they looked around, the Che­va­li­er Tialys was calm­ly on guard close by.

“The force of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court has re­treat­ed,” he told them. “Mrs. Coul­ter is in the hands of King Ogun­we, and on her way to Lord As­riel.”

“How do you know?” said Will, sit­ting up stiffly. “Have you been back through the win­dow?”

“No. We talk through the lode­stone res­ona­tor. I re­port­ed our con­ver­sa­tion,” Tialys said to Lyra, “to my com­man­der, Lord Roke, and he has agreed that we should go with you to the bear, and that once you have seen him, you will come with us. So we are al­lies, and we shall help you as much as we can.”

“Good,” said Will. “Then let’s eat to­geth­er. Do you eat our food?”

“Thank you, yes,” said the La­dy.

Will took out his last few dried peach­es and the stale flat loaf of rye bread, which was all he had left, and shared it among them, though of course the spies did not take much.

“As for wa­ter, there doesn’t seem to be any around here on this world,” Will said. “We’ll have to wait till we go back through be­fore we can have a drink.”

“Then we bet­ter do that soon,” said Lyra.

First, though, she took out the alethiome­ter and asked if there was still any dan­ger in the val­ley. No, came the an­swer, all the sol­diers have gone, and the vil­lagers are in their homes; so they pre­pared to leave.

The win­dow looked strange in the daz­zling air of the desert, giv­ing on­to the deepshad­ed bush, a square of thick green veg­eta­tion hang­ing in the air like a paint­ing. The Gal­livespi­ans want­ed to look at it, and were as­tound­ed to see how it was just not there from the back, and how it on­ly sprang in­to be­ing when you came round from the side.

“I’ll have to close it once we’re through,” Will said.

Lyra tried to pinch the edges to­geth­er af­ter they went through, but her fin­gers couldn’t find it at all; nor could the spies, de­spite the fine­ness of their hands. On­ly Will could feel ex­act­ly where the edges were, and he did it clean­ly and quick­ly.

“How many worlds can you en­ter with the knife?” said Tialys.

“As many as there are,” said Will. “No one would ev­er have time to find out.”

He swung his ruck­sack up and led the way along the for­est path. The drag­on­flies rel­ished the fresh, moist air and dart­ed like nee­dles through the shafts of sun­light. The move­ment of the trees above was less vi­olent, and the air was cool and tran­quil; so it was all the more shock­ing to see the twist­ed wreck­age of a gy­ropter sus­pend­ed among the branch­es, with the body of its African pi­lot, tan­gled in his seat belt, half out of the door, and to find the charred re­mains of the zep­pelin a lit­tle far­ther up, soot­black strips of cloth, black­ened struts and pipe work, bro­ken glass, and then the bod­ies: three men burned to cin­ders, their limbs con­tort­ed and drawn up as if they were still threat­en­ing to fight.

And they were on­ly the ones who had fall­en near the path. There were oth­er bod­ies and more wreck­age on the cliff above and among the trees far­ther down. Shocked and si­lenced, the two chil­dren moved through the car­nage, while the spies on their drag­on­flies looked around more cool­ly, ac­cus­tomed to bat­tle, not­ing how it had gone and who had lost most.

When they reached the top of the val­ley, where the trees thinned out and the rain­bowwa­ter­falls be­gan, they stopped to drink deeply of the icecold wa­ter.

“I hope that lit­tle girl’s all right,” said Will. “We’d nev­er have got you away if she hadn’t wo­ken you up. She went to a holy man to get that pow­der spe­cial­ly.”

“She is all right,” said Lyra, ” ’cause I asked the alethiome­ter, last night. She thinks we’re dev­ils, though. She’s afraid of us. She prob­ably wish­es she’d nev­er got mixed up in it, but she’s safe all right.”

They climbed up be­side the wa­ter­falls and re­filled Will’s can­teen be­fore strik­ing off across the plateau to­ward the ridge where the alethiome­ter told Lyra that Iorek had gone.

And then there came a day of long, hard walk­ing: no trou­ble for Will, but a tor­ment to Lyra, whose limbs were weak­ened and soft­ened af­ter her long sleep. But she would soon­er have her tongue torn out than con­fess how bad she felt; limp­ing, tightlipped, trem­bling, she kept pace with Will and said noth­ing. On­ly when they sat down at noon did she al­low her­self so much as a whim­per, and then on­ly when Will had gone apart to re­lieve him­self.

The La­dy Salmakia said, “Rest. There is no dis­grace in be­ing weary.”

“But I don’t want to let Will down! I don’t want him to think I’m weak and hold­ing him back.”

“That’s the last thing he thinks.”

“You don’t know,” said Lyra rude­ly. “You don’t know him any more than you know me.”

“I know im­per­ti­nence when I hear it,” said the La­dy calm­ly. “Do as I tell you now and rest. Save your en­er­gy for the walk­ing.”

Lyra felt mu­ti­nous, but the La­dy’s glit­ter­ing spurs were very clear in the sun­light, so she said noth­ing.

The La­dy’s com­pan­ion, the Che­va­li­er, was open­ing the case of the lode­stone res­ona­tor, and, cu­rios­ity over­com­ing re­sent­ment, Lyra watched to see what he did. The in­stru­ment looked like a short length of pen­cil made of dull gray­black stone, rest­ing on a stand of wood, and the Che­va­li­er swept a tiny bow like a vi­olin­ist’s across the end while he pressed his fin­gers at var­ious points along the sur­face. The places weren’t marked, so he seemed to be touch­ing it at ran­dom, but from the in­ten­si­ty of his ex­pres­sion and the cer­tain flu­en­cy of his move­ments, Lyra knew it was as skill­ful and de­mand­ing a pro­cess as her own read­ing of the alethiome­ter.

Af­ter sev­er­al min­utes the spy put the bow away and took up a pair of head­phones, the ear­pieces no larg­er than Lyra’s lit­tle fin­ger­nail, and wrapped one end of the wire tight­ly around a peg in the end of the stone, lead­ing the rest along to an­oth­er peg at the oth­er end and wrap­ping it around that. By ma­nip­ulat­ing the two pegs and the ten­sion on the wire be­tween them, he could ob­vi­ous­ly hear a re­sponse to his own mes­sage.

“How does that work?” she said when he’d fin­ished.

Tialys looked at her as if to judge whether she was gen­uine­ly in­ter­est­ed, and then said, “Your sci­en­tists, what do you call them, ex­per­imen­tal the­olo­gi­ans, would know of some­thing called quan­tum en­tan­gle­ment. It means that two par­ti­cles can ex­ist that on­ly have prop­er­ties in com­mon, so that what­ev­er hap­pens to one hap­pens to the oth­er at the same mo­ment, no mat­ter how far apart they are. Well, in our world there is a way of tak­ing a com­mon lode­stone and en­tan­gling all its par­ti­cles, and then split­ting it in two so that both parts res­onate to­geth­er. The coun­ter­part to this is with Lord Roke, our com­man­der. When I play on this one with my bow, the oth­er one re­pro­duces the sounds ex­act­ly, and so we com­mu­ni­cate.”

He put ev­ery­thing away and said some­thing to the La­dy. She joined him and they went a lit­tle apart, talk­ing too qui­et­ly for Lyra to hear, though Pan­ta­lai­mon be­came an owl and turned his great ears in their di­rec­tion.

Present­ly Will came back and then they moved on, more slow­ly as the day went by and the track got steep­er and the snow line near­er. They rest­ed once more at the head of a rocky val­ley, be­cause even Will could tell that Lyra was near­ly fin­ished: she was limp­ing bad­ly and her face was gray.

“Let me see your feet,” he said to her, “be­cause if they’re blis­tered, I’ll put some oint­ment on.”

They were, bad­ly, and she let him rub in the blood­moss salve, clos­ing her eyes and grit­ting her teeth.

Mean­while, the Che­va­li­er was busy, and af­ter a few min­utes he put his lode­stone away and said, “I have told Lord Roke of our po­si­tion, and they are send­ing a gy­ropter to bring us away as soon as you have spo­ken to your friend.”

Will nod­ded. Lyra took no no­tice. Present­ly she sat up weari­ly and pulled on her socks and shoes, and they set off once more.

An­oth­er hour, and most of the val­ley was in shad­ow, and Will was won­der­ing whether they would find any shel­ter be­fore night fell; but then Lyra gave a cry of re­lief and joy.

“Iorek! Iorek!”

She had seen him be­fore Will had. The bear­king was some way off still, his white coat in­dis­tinct against a patch of snow, but when Lyra’s voice echoed out he turned his head, raised it to sniff, and bound­ed down the moun­tain­side to­ward them.

Ig­nor­ing Will, he let Lyra clasp his neck and bury her face in his fur, growl­ing so deep that Will felt it through his feet; but Lyra felt it as plea­sure and for­got her blis­ters and her weari­ness in a mo­ment.

“Oh, Iorek, my dear, I’m so glad to see you! I nev­er thought I’d ev­er see you again, af­ter that time on Sval­bard, and all the things that’ve hap­pened, is Mr. Scores­by safe? How’s your king­dom? Are you all alone here?”

The lit­tle spies had van­ished; at all events, there seemed to be on­ly the three of them now on the dark­en­ing moun­tain­side, the boy and the girl and the great white bear. As if she had nev­er want­ed to be any­where else, Lyra climbed up as Iorek of­fered his back and rode proud and hap­py as her dear friend car­ried her up the last stretch of the way to his cave.

Will, pre­oc­cu­pied, didn’t lis­ten as Lyra talked to Iorek, though he did hear a cry of dis­may at one point, and heard her say:

“Mr. Scores­by, oh no! Oh, it’s too cru­el! Re­al­ly dead? You’re sure, Iorek?”

“The witch told me he set out to find the man called Grum­man,” said the bear.

Will lis­tened more close­ly now, for Baruch and Balthamos had told him some of this.

“What hap­pened? Who killed him?” said Lyra, her voice shaky.

“He died fight­ing. He kept a whole com­pa­ny of Mus­covites at bay while the man es­caped. I found his body. He died brave­ly. I shall avenge him.”

Lyra was weep­ing freely, and Will didn’t know what to say, for it was his fa­ther whom this un­known man had died to save; and Lyra and the bear had both known and loved Lee Scores­by, and he had not.

Soon Iorek turned aside and made for the en­trance to a cave, very dark against the snow. Will didn’t know where the spies were, but he was per­fect­ly sure they were near­by. He want­ed to speak qui­et­ly to Lyra, but not till he could see the Gal­livespi­ans and know he wasn’t be­ing over­heard.

He laid his ruck­sack in the cave mouth and sat down weari­ly. Be­hind him the bear was kin­dling a fire, and Lyra watched, cu­ri­ous de­spite her sor­row. Iorek held a small rock of some sort of iron­stone in his left forepaw and struck it no more than three or four times on a sim­ilar one on the floor. Each time a scat­ter of sparks burst out and went ex­act­ly where Iorek di­rect­ed them: in­to a heap of shred­ded twigs and dried grass. Very soon that was ablaze, and Iorek calm­ly placed one log and then an­oth­er and an­oth­er un­til the fire was burn­ing strong­ly.

The chil­dren wel­comed it, be­cause the air was very cold now, and then came some­thing even bet­ter: a haunch of some­thing that might have been goat. Iorek ate his meat raw, of course, but he spit­ted its joint on a sharp stick and laid it to roast across the fire for the two of them.

“Is it easy, hunt­ing up in these moun­tains, Iorek?” she said.

“No. My peo­ple can’t live here. I was wrong, but luck­ily so, since I found you. What are your plans now?”

Will looked around the cave. They were sit­ting close to the fire, and the fire­light threw warm yel­lows and or­anges on the bear­king’s fur. Will could see no sign of the spies, but there was noth­ing for it: he had to ask.

“King Iorek,” he be­gan, “my knife is bro­ken… Then he looked past the bear and said, “No, wait.” He was point­ing at the wall. “If you’re lis­ten­ing,” he went on more loud­ly, “come out and do it hon­est­ly. Don’t spy on us.”

Lyra and Iorek Byr­ni­son turned to see who he was talk­ing to. The lit­tle man came out of the shad­ow and stood calm­ly in the light, on a ledge high­er than the chil­dren’s heads, Iorek growled.

“You haven’t asked Iorek Byr­ni­son for per­mis­sion to en­ter his cave,” Will said. “And he is a king, and you’re just a spy. You should show more re­spect.”

Lyra loved hear­ing that. She looked at Will with plea­sure, and saw him fierce and con­temp­tu­ous.

But the Che­va­li­er’s ex­pres­sion, as he looked at Will, was dis­pleased.

“We have been truth­ful with you,” he said. “It was dis­hon­or­able to de­ceive us.”

Will stood up. His dae­mon, Lyra thought, would have the form of a ti­gress, and she shrank back from the anger she imag­in­ed the great an­imal to show.

“If we de­ceived you, it was nec­es­sary,” he said. “Would you have agreed to come here if you knew the knife was bro­ken? Of course you wouldn’t. You’d have used your ven­om to make us un­con­scious, and then you’d have called for help and had us kid­napped and tak­en to Lord As­riel. So we had to trick you, Tialys, and you’ll just have to put up with it.”

Iorek Byr­ni­son said, “Who is this?”

“Spies,” said Will. “Sent by Lord As­riel. They helped us es­cape yes­ter­day, but if they’re on our side, they shouldn’t hide and eaves­drop on us. And if they do, they’re the last peo­ple who should talk about dis­hon­or.”

The spy’s glare was so fe­ro­cious that he looked ready to take on Iorek him­self, nev­er mind the un­armed Will; but Tialys was in the wrong, and he knew it. All he could do was bow and apol­ogize.

“Your Majesty,” he said to Iorek, who growled at once.

The Che­va­li­er’s eyes flashed ha­tred at Will, and de­fi­an­ce and warn­ing at Lyra, and a cold and wary re­spect at Iorek. The clar­ity of his fea­tures made all these ex­pres­sions vivid and bright, as if a light shone on him. Be­side him the La­dy Salmakia was emerg­ing from the shad­ow, and, ig­nor­ing the chil­dren com­plete­ly, she made a curt­sy to the bear.

“For­give us,” she said to Iorek. “The habit of con­ceal­ment is hard to break, and my com­pan­ion, the Che­va­li­er Tialys, And I, the La­dy Salmakia, have been among our en­emies for so long that out of pure habit we ne­glect­ed to pay you the prop­er cour­tesy. We’re ac­com­pa­ny­ing this boy and girl to make sure they ar­rive safe­ly in the care of Lord As­riel. We have no oth­er aim, and cer­tain­ly no harm­ful in­ten­tion to­ward you, King Iorek Byr­ni­son.”

If Iorek won­dered how any such tiny be­in­gs could cause him harm, he didn’t show it; not on­ly was his ex­pres­sion nat­ural­ly hard to read, but he had his cour­tesy, too, and the La­dy had spo­ken gra­cious­ly enough.

“Come down by the fire,” he said. “There is food enough and plen­ty if you are hun­gry. Will, you be­gan to speak about the knife.”

“Yes,” said Will, “and I thought it could nev­er hap­pen, but it’s bro­ken. And the alethiome­ter told Lyra that you’d be able to mend it. I was go­ing to ask more po­lite­ly, but there it is: can you mend it, Iorek?”

“Show me.”

Will shook all the pieces out of the sheath and laid them on the rocky floor, push­ing them about care­ful­ly un­til they were in their right places and he could see that they were all there. Lyra held a burn­ing branch up, and in its light Iorek bent low to look close­ly at each piece, touch­ing it del­icate­ly with his mas­sive claws and lift­ing it up to turn it this way and that and ex­am­ine the break. Will mar­veled at the deft­ness in those huge black hooks.

Then Iorek sat up again, his head rear­ing high in­to the shad­ow.

“Yes,” he said, an­swer­ing ex­act­ly the ques­tion and no more.

Lyra said, know­ing what he meant, “Ah, but will you, Iorek? You couldn’t be­lieve how im­por­tant this is, if we can’t get it mend­ed then we’re in des­per­ate trou­ble, and not on­ly us…

“I don’t like that knife,” Iorek said. “I fear what it can do. I have nev­er known any­thing so dan­ger­ous. The most dead­ly fight­ing ma­chines are lit­tle toys com­pared to that knife; the harm it can do is un­lim­it­ed. It would have been in­fi­nite­ly bet­ter if it had nev­er been made.”

“But with it… be­gan Will.

Iorek didn’t let him fin­ish, but went on, “With it you can do strange things. What you don’t know is what the knife does on its own. Your in­ten­tions may be good. The knife has in­ten­tions, too.”

“How can that be?” said Will.

“The in­ten­tions of a tool are what it does. A ham­mer in­tends to strike, a vise in­tends to hold fast, a lever in­tends to lift. They are what it is made for. But some­times a tool may have oth­er us­es that you don’t know. Some­times in do­ing what you in­tend, you al­so do what the knife in­tends, with­out know­ing. Can you see the sharpest edge of that knife?”

“No,” said Will, for it was true: the edge di­min­ished to a thin­ness so fine that the eye could not reach it.

“Then how can you know ev­ery­thing it does?”

“I can’t. But I must still use it, and do what I can to help good things come about. If I did noth­ing, I’d be worse than use­less. I’d be guilty.”

Lyra was fol­low­ing this close­ly, and see­ing Iorek still un­will­ing, she said:

“Iorek, you know how wicked those Bolvan­gar peo­ple were. If we can’t win, then they’re go­ing to be able to car­ry on do­ing those kind of things for­ev­er. And be­sides, if we don’t have the knife, then they might get hold of it them­selves. We nev­er knew about it when I first met you, Iorek, and nor did any­one, but now that we do, we got to use it our­selves, we can’t just not. That’d be fee­ble, and it’d be wrong, too, it’d be just like hand­ing it over to ‘em and say­ing, ‘Go on, use it, we won’t stop you.’ All right, we don’t know what it does, but I can ask the alethiome­ter, can’t I? Then we’d know. And we could think about it prop­er­ly, in­stead of just guess­ing and be­ing afraid.”

Will didn’t want to men­tion his own most press­ing rea­son: if the knife was not re­paired, he might nev­er get home, nev­er see his moth­er again; she would nev­er know what had hap­pened; she’d think he’d aban­doned her as his fa­ther had done. The knife would have been di­rect­ly re­spon­si­ble for both their de­ser­tions. He must use it to re­turn to her, or nev­er for­give him­self.

Iorek Byr­ni­son said noth­ing for a long time, but turned his head to look out at the dark­ness. Then he slow­ly got to his feet and stalked to the cave mouth, and looked up at the stars: some the same as those he knew, from the north, and some that were strange to him.

Be­hind him, Lyra turned the meat over on the fire, and Will looked at his wounds, to see how they were heal­ing. Tialys and Salmakia sat silent on their ledge.

Then Iorek turned around.

“Very well, I shall do it on one con­di­tion,” he said. “Though I feel it is a mis­take. My peo­ple have no gods, no ghosts or dae­mons. We live and die and that is that. Hu­man af­fairs bring us noth­ing but sor­row and trou­ble, but we have lan­guage and we make war and we use tools; maybe we should take sides. But full knowl­edge is bet­ter than half­knowl­edge. Lyra, read your in­stru­ment. Know what it is that you’re ask­ing. If you still want it then, I shall mend the knife.”

At once Lyra took out the alethiome­ter and edged near­er to the fire so that she could see the face. The read­ing took her longer than usu­al, and when she blinked and sighed and came out of the trance, her face was trou­bled.

“I nev­er known it so con­fused,” she said. “There was lots of things it said. I think I got it clear. I think so. It said about bal­an­ce first. It said the knife could be harm­ful or it could do good, but it was so slight, such a del­icate kind of a bal­an­ce, that the faintest thought or wish could tip it one way or the oth­er…And it meant you, Will, it meant what you wished or thought, on­ly it didn’t say what would be a good thought or a bad one.

“Then… it said yes,” she said, her eyes flash­ing at the spies. “It said yes, do it, re­pair the knife.”

Iorek looked at her stea­di­ly and then nod­ded once.

Tialys and Salmakia climbed down to watch more close­ly, and Lyra said, “D’you need more fu­el, Iorek? Me and Will could go and fetch some, I’m sure.”

Will un­der­stood what she meant: away from the spies they could talk.

Iorek said, “Be­low the first spur on the track, there is a bush with resinous wood. Bring as much of that as you can.”

She jumped up at once, and Will went with her.

The moon was bril­liant, the path a track of scum­bled foot­prints in the snow, the air cut­ting and cold. Both of them felt brisk and hope­ful and alive. They didn’t talk till they were well away from the cave.

“What else did it say?” Will said.

“It said some things I didn’t un­der­stand then and I still don’t un­der­stand now. It said the knife would be the death of Dust, but then it said it was the on­ly way to keep Dust alive. I didn’t un­der­stand it, Will. But it said again it was dan­ger­ous, it kept say­ing that. It said if we, you know, what I thought…

“If we go to the world of the dead…

“Yeah, if we do that, it said that we might nev­er come back, Will. We might not sur­vive.”

He said noth­ing, and they walked along more sober­ly now, watch­ing out for the bush that Iorek had men­tioned, and si­lenced by the thought of what they might be tak­ing on.

“We’ve got to, though,” he said, “haven’t we?”

“I don’t know.”

“Now we know, I mean. You have to speak to Roger, and I want to speak to my fa­ther. We have to, now.”

“I’m fright­ened,” she said.

And he knew she’d nev­er ad­mit that to any­one else.

“Did it say what would hap­pen if we didn’t?” he asked.

“Just emp­ti­ness, just blank­ness. I re­al­ly didn’t un­der­stand it, Will. But I think it meant that even if it is that dan­ger­ous, we should still try and res­cue Roger. But it won’t be like when I res­cued him from Bolvan­gar; I didn’t know what I was do­ing then, re­al­ly, I just set off, and I was lucky. I mean there was all kinds of oth­er peo­ple to help, like the gyp­tians and the witch­es. There won’t be any help where we’d have to go. And I can see… In my dream I saw… The place was… It was worse than Bolvan­gar. That’s why I’m afraid.”

“What I’m afraid of,” said Will af­ter a minute, not look­ing at her at all, “is get­ting stuck some­where and nev­er see­ing my moth­er again.”

From nowhere a mem­ory came to him: he was very young, and it was be­fore her trou­bles be­gan, and he was ill. All night long, it seemed, his moth­er had sat on his bed in the dark, singing nurs­ery rhymes, telling him sto­ries, and as long as her dear voice was there, he knew he was safe. He couldn’t aban­don her now. He couldn’t! He’d look af­ter her all his life long if she need­ed it.

And as if Lyra had known what he was think­ing, she said warm­ly:

“Yeah, that’s true, that would be aw­ful… You know, with my moth­er, I nev­er re­al­ized… I just grew up on my own, re­al­ly; I don’t re­mem­ber any­one ev­er hold­ing me or cud­dling me, it was just me and Pan as far back as I can go… I can’t re­mem­ber Mrs. Lons­dale be­ing like that to me; she was the house­keep­er at Jor­dan Col­lege, all she did was make sure I was clean, that’s all she thought about… oh, and man­ners… But in the cave, Will, I re­al­ly felt, oh, it’s strange, I know she’s done ter­ri­ble things, but I re­al­ly felt she was lov­ing me and look­ing af­ter me… She must have thought I was go­ing to die, be­ing asleep all that time, I sup­pose I must’ve caught some dis­ease, but she nev­er stopped look­ing af­ter me. And I re­mem­ber wak­ing up once or twice and she was hold­ing me in her arms… I do re­mem­ber that, I’m sure… That’s what I’d do in her place, if I had a child.”

So she didn’t know why she’d been asleep all that time. Should he tell her, and be­tray that mem­ory, even if it was false? No, of course he shouldn’t.

“Is that the bush?” Lyra said.

The moon­light was bril­liant enough to show ev­ery leaf. Will snapped off a twig, and the piney resinous smell stayed strong­ly on his fin­gers.

“And we en’t go­ing to say any­thing to those lit­tle spies,” she added.

They gath­ered arm­fuls of the bush and car­ried them back up to­ward the cave.





The Amber Spyglass





FIFTEEN - THE FORGE


At that mo­ment the Gal­livespi­ans, too, were talk­ing about the knife. Hav­ing made a sus­pi­cious peace with Iorek Byr­ni­son, they climbed back to their ledge to be out of the way, and as the crack­le of flames rose and the snap­ping and roar­ing of the fire filled the air, Tialys said, “We must nev­er leave his side. As soon as the knife is mend­ed, we must keep clos­er than a shad­ow.”

“He is too alert. He watch­es ev­ery­where for us,” said Salmakia. “The girl is more trust­ing. I think we could win her around. She’s in­no­cent, and she loves eas­ily. We could work on her. I think we should do that, Tialys.”

“But he has the knife. He is the one who can use it.”

“He won’t go any­where with­out her.”

“But she has to fol­low him, if he has the knife. And I think that as soon as the knife’s in­tact again, they’ll use it to slip in­to an­oth­er world, so as to get away from us. Did you see how he stopped her from speak­ing when she was go­ing to say some­thing more? They have some se­cret pur­pose, and it’s very dif­fer­ent from what we want them to do.”

“We’ll see. But you’re right, Tialys, I think. We must stay close to the boy at all costs.”

They both watched with some skep­ti­cism as Iorek Byr­ni­son laid out the tools in his im­pro­vised work­shop. The mighty work­ers in the ord­nance fac­to­ries un­der Lord As­riel’s fortress, with their blast fur­naces and rolling mills, their an­bar­ic forges and hy­draulic press­es, would have laughed at the open fire, the stone ham­mer, the anvil con­sist­ing of a piece of Iorek’s ar­mor. Nev­er­the­less, the bear had tak­en the mea­sure of the task, and in the cer­tain­ty of his move­ments the lit­tle spies be­gan to see some qual­ity that muf­fled their scorn.

When Lyra and Will came in with the bush­es, Iorek di­rect­ed them in plac­ing branch­es care­ful­ly on the fire. He looked at each branch, turn­ing it from side to side, and then told Will or Lyra to place it at suchand­such an an­gle, or to break off part and place it sep­arate­ly at the edge. The re­sult was a fire of ex­traor­di­nary fe­roc­ity, with all its en­er­gy con­cen­trat­ed at one side.

By this time the heat in the cave was in­tense. Iorek con­tin­ued to build the fire, and made the chil­dren take two more trips down the path to en­sure that there was enough fu­el for the whole op­er­ation.

Then the bear turned over a small stone on the floor and told Lyra to find some more stones of the same kind. He said that those stones, when heat­ed, gave off a gas that would sur­round the blade and keep the air from it, for if the hot met­al came in con­tact with the air, it would ab­sorb some and be weak­ened by it.

Lyra set about search­ing, and with owleyed Pan­ta­lai­mon’s help soon had a dozen or more stones to hand. Iorek told her how to place them, and where, and showed her ex­act­ly the kind of draft she should get mov­ing, with a leafy branch, to make sure the gas flowed even­ly over the work piece.

Will was placed in charge of the fire, and Iorek spent sev­er­al min­utes di­rect­ing him and mak­ing sure he un­der­stood the prin­ci­ples he was to use. So much de­pend­ed on ex­act place­ment, and Iorek could not stop and cor­rect each one; Will had to un­der­stand, and then he’d do it prop­er­ly.

Fur­ther­more, he mustn’t ex­pect the knife to look ex­act­ly the same when it was mend­ed. It would be short­er, be­cause each sec­tion of the blade would have to over­lap the next by a lit­tle way so they could be forged to­geth­er; and the sur­face would have ox­idized a lit­tle, de­spite the stone­gas, so some of the play of col­or would be lost; and no doubt the han­dle would be charred. But the blade would be just as sharp, and it would work.

So Will watched as the flames roared along the resinous twigs, and with stream­ing eyes and scorched hands he ad­just­ed each fresh branch till the heat was fo­cused as Iorek want­ed it.

Mean­while, Iorek him­self was grind­ing and ham­mer­ing a fist­sized stone, hav­ing re­ject­ed sev­er­al un­til he found one of the right weight. With mas­sive blows he shaped it and smoothed it, the cordite smell of smashed rocks join­ing the smoke in the nos­trils of the two spies, watch­ing from high up. Even Pan­ta­lai­mon was ac­tive, chang­ing to a crow so he could flap his wings and make the fire burn faster.

Even­tu­al­ly the ham­mer was formed to Iorek’s sat­is­fac­tion, and he set the first two pieces of the blade of the sub­tle knife among the fierce­burn­ing wood at the heart of the fire, and told Lyra to be­gin waft­ing the stone­gas over them. The bear watched, his long white face lurid in the glare, and Will saw the sur­face of the met­al be­gin to glow red and then yel­low and then white.

Iorek was watch­ing close­ly, his paw held ready to snatch the pieces out. Af­ter a few mo­ments the met­al changed again, and the sur­face be­came shiny and glis­ten­ing, and sparks just like those from a fire­work sprayed up from it.

Then Iorek moved. His right paw dart­ed in and seized first one piece and then the oth­er, hold­ing them be­tween the tips of his mas­sive claws and plac­ing them on the slab of iron that was the back­plate of his ar­mor. Will could smell the claws burn­ing, but Iorek took no no­tice of that, and mov­ing with ex­traor­di­nary speed he ad­just­ed the an­gle at which the pieces over­lapped and then raised his left paw high and struck a blow with the rock ham­mer.

The knife tip leapt on the rock un­der the mas­sive blow. Will was think­ing that the whole of the rest of his life de­pend­ed on what hap­pened in that tiny tri­an­gle of met­al, that point that searched out the gaps in­side the atoms, and all his nerves trem­bled, sens­ing ev­ery flick­er of ev­ery flame and the loos­en­ing of ev­ery atom in the lat­tice of the met­al. Be­fore this be­gan, he had sup­posed that on­ly a fullscale fur­nace, with the finest tools and equip­ment, could work on that blade; but now he saw that these were the finest tools, and that Iorek’s artistry had con­struct­ed the best fur­nace there could be.

Iorek roared above the clan­gor, “Hold it still in your mind! You have to forge it, too! This is your task as much as mine!”

Will felt his whole be­ing quiver un­der the blows of the stone ham­mer in the bear’s fist. The sec­ond piece of the blade was heat­ing, too, and Lyra’s leafy branch sent the hot gas along to bathe both pieces in its flow and keep out the ironeat­ing air. Will sensed it all and felt the atoms of the met­al link­ing each to each across the frac­ture, form­ing new crys­tals again, strength­en­ing and straight­en­ing them­selves in the in­vis­ible lat­tice as the join came good.

“The edge!” roared Iorek. “Hold the edge in line!”

He meant with your mind, and Will did it in­stant­ly, sens­ing the minute snags and then the minute ease­ment as the edges lined up per­fect­ly. Then that join was made, and Iorek turned to the next piece.

“A new stone,” he called to Lyra, who knocked the first one aside and placed a sec­ond on the spot to heat.

Will checked the fu­el and snapped a branch in two to di­rect the flames bet­ter, and Iorek be­gan to work with the ham­mer once more. Will felt a new lay­er of com­plex­ity added to his task, be­cause he had to hold the new piece in a pre­cise re­la­tion with both the pre­vi­ous two, and he un­der­stood that on­ly by do­ing that ac­cu­rate­ly could he help Iorek mend it.

So the work con­tin­ued. He had no idea how long it took; Lyra, for her part, found her arms aching, her eyes stream­ing, her skin scorched and red, and ev­ery bone in her body aching with fa­tigue; but still she placed each stone as Iorek had told her, and still the weary Pan­ta­lai­mon raised his wings read­ily and beat them over the flames.

When it came to the fi­nal join, Will’s head was ring­ing, and he was so ex­haust­ed by the in­tel­lec­tu­al ef­fort he could bare­ly lift the next branch on­to the fire. He had to un­der­stand ev­ery con­nec­tion, or the knife would not hold to­geth­er. And when it came to the most com­plex one, the last, which would af­fix the near­ly fin­ished blade on­to the small part re­main­ing at the han­dle, if he couldn’t hold it in his full con­scious­ness to­geth­er with all the oth­ers, then the knife would sim­ply fall apart as if Iorek had nev­er be­gun.

The bear sensed this, too, and paused be­fore he be­gan heat­ing the last piece. He looked at Will, and in his eyes Will could see noth­ing, no ex­pres­sion, just a bot­tom­less black bril­liance. Nev­er­the­less, he un­der­stood: this was work, and it was hard, but they were equal to it, all of them.

That was enough for Will, so he turned back to the fire and sent his imag­ina­tion out to the bro­ken end of the haft, and braced him­self for the last and fiercest part of the task.

So he and Iorek and Lyra to­geth­er forged the knife, and how long the fi­nal join took he had no idea; but when Iorek had struck the fi­nal blow, and Will had felt the fi­nal tiny set­tling as the atoms con­nect­ed across the break, Will sank down on­to the floor of the cave and let ex­haus­tion pos­sess him. Lyra near­by was in the same state, her eyes glassy and redrimmed, her hair full of soot and smoke; and Iorek him­self stood heavy­head­ed, his fur singed in sev­er­al places, dark streaks of ash mark­ing its rich creamwhite.

Tialys and Salmakia had slept in turns, one of them al­ways alert. Now she was awake and he was sleep­ing, but as the blade cooled from red to gray and fi­nal­ly to sil­ver, and as Will reached out for the han­dle, she woke her part­ner with a hand on his shoul­der. He was alert at once.

But Will didn’t touch the knife: he held his palm close by, and the heat was still too great for his hand. The spies re­laxed on the rocky shelf as Iorek said to Will:

“Come out­side.”

Then he said to Lyra: “Stay here, and don’t touch the knife.”

Lyra sat close to the anvil, where the knife lay cool­ing, and Iorek told her to bank the fire up and not let it burn down: there was a fi­nal op­er­ation yet.

Will fol­lowed the great bear out on­to the dark moun­tain­side. The cold was bit­ter and in­stan­ta­neous, af­ter the in­fer­no in the cave.

“They should not have made that knife,” said Iorek, af­ter they had walked a lit­tle way. “Maybe I should not have mend­ed it. I’m trou­bled, and I have nev­er been trou­bled be­fore, nev­er in doubt. Now I am full of doubt. Doubt is a hu­man thing, not a bear thing. If I am be­com­ing hu­man, some­thing’s wrong, some­thing’s bad. And I’ve made it worse.”

“But when the first bear made the first piece of ar­mor, wasn’t that bad, too, in the same way?”

Iorek was silent. They walked on till they came to a big drift of snow, and Iorek lay in it and rolled this way and that, send­ing flur­ries of snow up in­to the dark air, so that it looked as if he him­self were made of snow, he was the per­son­ifi­ca­tion of all the snow in the world.

When he was fin­ished, he rolled over and stood up and shook him­self vig­or­ous­ly, and then, see­ing Will still wait­ing for an an­swer to his ques­tion, said:

“Yes, I think it might have been, too. But be­fore that first ar­mored bear, there were no oth­ers. We know of noth­ing be­fore that. That was when cus­tom be­gan. We know our cus­toms, and they are firm and sol­id and we fol­low them with­out change. Bear na­ture is weak with­out cus­tom, as bear flesh is un­pro­tect­ed with­out ar­mor.

“But I think I have stepped out­side bear na­ture in mend­ing this knife. I think I’ve been as fool­ish as lo­fur Rakin­son. Time will tell. But I am un­cer­tain and doubt­ful. Now you must tell me: why did the knife break?”

Will rubbed his aching head with both hands.

“The wom­an looked at me and I thought she had the face of my moth­er,” he said, try­ing to rec­ol­lect the ex­pe­ri­ence with all the hon­es­ty he had. “And the knife came up against some­thing it couldn’t cut, and be­cause my mind was push­ing it through and forc­ing it back both at the same time, it snapped. That’s what I think. The wom­an knew what she was do­ing, I’m sure. She’s very clever.”

“When you talk of the knife, you talk of your moth­er and fa­ther.”

“Do I? Yes… I sup­pose I do.”

“What are you go­ing to do with it?”

“I don’t know.”

Sud­den­ly Iorek lunged at Will and cuffed him hard with his left paw: so hard that Will fell half­stunned in­to the snow and tum­bled over and over un­til he end­ed some way down the slope with his head ring­ing.

Iorek came down slow­ly to where Will was strug­gling up, and said, “An­swer me truth­ful­ly.”

Will was tempt­ed to say, “You wouldn’t have done that if I’d had the knife in my hand.” But he knew that Iorek knew that, and knew that he knew it, and that it would be dis­cour­te­ous and stupid to say it; but he was tempt­ed, all the same.

He held his tongue un­til he was stand­ing up­right, fac­ing Iorek di­rect­ly.

“I said I don’t know,” he said, try­ing hard to keep his voice calm, “be­cause I haven’t looked clear­ly at what it is that I’m go­ing to do. At what it means. It fright­ens me. And it fright­ens Lyra, too. Any­way, I agreed as soon as I heard what she said.”

“And what was that?”

“We want to go down to the land of the dead and talk to the ghost of Lyra’s friend Roger, the one who got killed on Sval­bard. And if there re­al­ly is a world of the dead, then my fa­ther will be there, too, and if we can talk to ghosts, I want to talk to him.

“But I’m di­vid­ed, I’m pulled apart, be­cause al­so I want to go back and look af­ter my moth­er, be­cause I could, and al­so the an­gel Balthamos told me I should go to Lord As­riel and of­fer the knife to him, and I think maybe he was right as well…”

“He fled,” said the bear.

“He wasn’t a war­ri­or. He did as much as he could, and then he couldn’t do any more. He wasn’t the on­ly one to be afraid; I’m afraid, too. So I have to think it through. Maybe some­times we don’t do the right thing be­cause the wrong thing looks more dan­ger­ous, and we don’t want to look scared, so we go and do the wrong thing just be­cause it’s dan­ger­ous. We’re more con­cerned with not look­ing scared than with judg­ing right. It’s very hard. That’s why I didn’t an­swer you.”

“I see,” said the bear.

They stood in si­lence for what felt like a long time, es­pe­cial­ly to Will, who had lit­tle pro­tec­tion from the bit­ter cold. But Iorek hadn’t fin­ished yet, and Will was still weak and dizzy from the blow, and didn’t quite trust his feet, so they stayed where they were.

“Well, I have com­pro­mised my­self in many ways,” said the bear­king. “It may be that in help­ing you I have brought fi­nal de­struc­tion on my king­dom. And it may be that I have not, and that de­struc­tion was com­ing any­way; maybe I have held it off. So I am trou­bled, hav­ing to do un­bear­like deeds and spec­ulate and doubt like a hu­man.

“And I shall tell you one thing. You know it al­ready, but you don’t want to, which is why I tell you open­ly, so that you don’t mis­take it. If you want to suc­ceed in this task, you must no longer think about your moth­er. You must put her aside. If your mind is di­vid­ed, the knife will break.

“Now I’m go­ing to say farewell to Lyra. You must wait in the cave; those two spies will not let you out of their sight, and I do not want them lis­ten­ing when I speak to her.”

Will had no words, though his breast and his throat were full. He man­aged to say, “Thank you, Iorek Byr­ni­son,” but that was all he could say.

He walked with Iorek up the slope to­ward the cave, where the fire glow still shone warm­ly in the vast sur­round­ing dark.

There Iorek car­ried out the last pro­cess in the mend­ing of the sub­tle knife. He laid it among the brighter cin­ders un­til the blade was glow­ing, and Will and Lyra saw a hun­dred col­ors swirling in the smoky depths of the met­al, and when he judged the mo­ment was right, Iorek told Will to take it and plunge it di­rect­ly in­to the snow that had drift­ed out­side.

The rose­wood han­dle was charred and scorched, but Will wrapped his hand in sev­er­al folds of a shirt and did as Iorek told him. In the hiss and flare of steam, he felt the atoms fi­nal­ly set­tle to­geth­er, and he knew that the knife was as keen as be­fore, the point as in­fi­nite­ly rare.

But it did look dif­fer­ent. It was short­er, and much less el­egant, and there was a dull sil­ver sur­face over each of the joins. It looked ug­ly now; it looked like what it was, wound­ed.

When it was cool enough, he packed it away in the ruck­sack and sat, ig­nor­ing the spies, to wait for Lyra to come back.

Iorek had tak­en her a lit­tle far­ther up the slope, to a point out of sight of the cave, and there he had let her sit cra­dled in the shel­ter of his great arms, with Pan­ta­lai­mon nestling mouse­formed at her breast. Iorek bent his head over her and nuz­zled at her scorched and smoky hands. With­out a word he be­gan to lick them clean; his tongue was sooth­ing on the burns, and she felt as safe as she had ev­er felt in her life.

But when her hands were free of soot and dirt, Iorek spoke. She felt his voice vi­brate against her back.

“Lyra Sil­ver­tongue, what is this plan to vis­it the dead?”

“It came to me in a dream, Iorek. I saw Roger’s ghost, and I knew he was call­ing to me… You re­mem­ber Roger. Well, af­ter we left you, he was killed, and it was my fault, at least I felt it was. And I think I should just fin­ish what I be­gan, that’s all: I should go and say sor­ry, and if I can, I should res­cue him from there. If Will can open a way to the world of the dead, then we must do it.”

“Can is not the same as must.”

“But if you must and you can, then there’s no ex­cuse.”

“While you are alive, your busi­ness is with life.”

“No, Iorek,” she said gen­tly, “our busi­ness is to keep promis­es, no mat­ter how dif­fi­cult they are. You know, se­cret­ly, I’m dead­ly scared. And I wish I’d nev­er had that dream, and I wish Will hadn’t thought of us­ing the knife to go there. But we did, so we can’t get out of it.”

Lyra felt Pan­ta­lai­mon trem­bling and stroked him with her sore hands.

“We don’t know how to get there, though,” she went on. “We won’t know any­thing till we try. What are you go­ing to do, Iorek?”

“I’m go­ing back north, with my peo­ple. We can’t live in the moun­tains. Even the snow is dif­fer­ent. I thought we could live here, but we can live more eas­ily in the sea, even if it is warm.

That was worth learn­ing. And be­sides, I think we will be need­ed. I can feel war, Lyra Sil­ver­tongue; I can smell it; I can hear it. I spoke to Ser­afi­na Pekkala be­fore I came this way, and she told me she was go­ing to Lord Faa and the gyp­tians. If there is war, we shall be need­ed.”

Lyra sat up, ex­cit­ed at hear­ing the names of her old friends. But Iorek hadn’t fin­ished. He went on:

“If you do not find a way out of the world of the dead, we shall not meet again, be­cause I have no ghost. My body will re­main on the earth, and then be­come part of it. But if it turns out that you and I both sur­vive, then you will al­ways be a wel­come and hon­ored vis­itor to Sval­bard; and the same is true of Will. Has he told you what hap­pened when we met?”

“No,” said Lyra, “ex­cept that it was by a riv­er.”

“He out­faced me. I thought no one could ev­er do that, but this half­grown boy was too dar­ing for me, and too clever. I am not hap­py that you should do what you plan, but there is no one I would trust to go with you ex­cept that boy. You are wor­thy of each oth­er. Go well, Lyra Sil­ver­tongue, my dear friend.”

She reached up and put her arms around his neck, and pressed her face in­to his fur, un­able to speak.

Af­ter a minute he stood up gen­tly and dis­en­gaged her arms, and then he turned and walked silent­ly away in­to the dark. Lyra thought his out­line was lost al­most at once against the pal­lor of the snow­cov­ered ground, but it might have been that her eyes were full of tears.

When Will heard her foot­steps on the path, he looked at the spies and said, “Don’t you move. Look, here’s the knife, I’m not go­ing to use it. Stay here.”

He went out­side and found Lyra stand­ing still, weep­ing, with Pan­ta­lai­mon as a wolf rais­ing his face to the black sky. She was quite silent. The on­ly light came from the pale re­flec­tion in the snow­bank of the re­mains of the fire, and that, in turn, was re­flect­ed from her wet cheeks, and her tears found their own re­flec­tion in Will’s eyes, and so those pho­tons wove the two chil­dren to­geth­er in a silent web.

“I love him so much, Will!” she man­aged to whis­per shak­ily. “And he looked old! He looked hun­gry and old and sad… Is it all com­ing on­to us now, Will? We can’t re­ly on any­one else now, can we… It’s just us. But we en’t old enough yet. We’re on­ly young… We’re too young… If poor Mr. Scores­by’s dead and Iorek’s old… It’s all com­ing on­to us, what’s got to be done.”

“We can do it,” he said. “I’m not go­ing to look back any­more. We can do it. But we’ve got to sleep now, and if we stay in this world, those gy­ropter things might come, the ones the spies sent for… I’m go­ing to cut through now and we’ll find an­oth­er world to sleep in, and if the spies come with us, that’s too bad; we’ll have to get rid of them an­oth­er time.”

“Yes,” she said, and sniffed and wiped the back of her hand across her nose and rubbed her eyes with both palms. “Let’s do that. You sure the knife will work? You test­ed it?”

“I know it’ll work.”

With Pan­ta­lai­mon tiger­formed to de­ter the spies, they hoped, Will and Lyra went back and picked up their ruck­sacks.

“What are you do­ing?” said Salmakia.

“Go­ing in­to an­oth­er world,” said Will, tak­ing out the knife. It felt like be­ing whole again; he hadn’t re­al­ized how much he loved it.

“But you must wait for Lord As­riel’s gy­ropters,” said Tialys, his voice hard.

“We’re not go­ing to,” said Will. “If you come near the knife, I’ll kill you. Come through with us if you must, but you can’t make us stay here. We’re leav­ing.”

“You lied!”

“No,” said Lyra, “I lied. Will doesn’t lie. You didn’t think of that.”

“But where are you go­ing?”

Will didn’t an­swer. He felt for­ward in the dim air and cut an open­ing.

Salmakia said, “This is a mis­take. You should re­al­ize that, and lis­ten to us. You haven’t thought…

“Yes, we have,” said Will, “we’ve thought hard, and we’ll tell you what we’ve thought to­mor­row. You can come where we’re go­ing, or you can go back to Lord As­riel.”

The win­dow opened on­to the world in­to which he had es­caped with Baruch and Balthamos, and where he’d slept safe­ly: the warm end­less beach with the fern­like trees be­hind the dunes. He said:

“Here, we’ll sleep here, this’ll do.”

He let them through and closed it be­hind them at once. While he and Lyra lay down where they were, ex­haust­ed, the La­dy Salmakia kept watch, and the Che­va­li­er opened his lode­stone res­ona­tor and be­gan to play a mes­sage in­to the dark.





The Amber Spyglass





SIXTEEN - THE INTENTION CRAFT


“My child! My daugh­ter! Where is she? What have you done? My Lyra, you’d do bet­ter to tear the fibers from my heart, she was safe with me, safe, and now where is she?”

Mrs. Coul­ter’s cry re­sound­ed through the lit­tle cham­ber at the top of the adamant tow­er. She was bound to a chair, her hair di­sheveled, her cloth­ing torn, her eyes wild; and her mon­key dae­mon thrashed and strug­gled on the floor in the coils of a sil­ver chain.

Lord As­riel sat near­by, scrib­bling on a piece of pa­per, tak­ing no no­tice. An or­der­ly stood be­side him, glanc­ing ner­vous­ly at the wom­an. When Lord As­riel hand­ed him the pa­per, he salut­ed and hur­ried out, his ter­ri­er dae­mon close at his heels with her tail tucked low.

Lord As­riel turned to Mrs. Coul­ter.

“Lyra? Frankly, I don’t care,” he said, his voice qui­et and hoarse. “The wretched child should have stayed where she was put, and done what she was told. I can’t waste any more time or re­sources on her; if she re­fus­es to be helped, let her deal with the con­se­quences.”

“You don’t mean that, As­riel, or you wouldn’t have…”

“I mean ev­ery word of it. The fuss she’s caused is out of all pro­por­tion to her mer­its. An or­di­nary En­glish girl, not very clever…

“She is!” said Mrs. Coul­ter.

“All right; bright but not in­tel­lec­tu­al; im­pul­sive, dis­hon­est, greedy…

“Brave, gen­er­ous, lov­ing.”

“A per­fect­ly or­di­nary child, dis­tin­guished by noth­ing… “Per­fect­ly or­di­nary? Lyra? She’s unique. Think of what she’s done al­ready. Dis­like her if you will, As­riel, but don’t you dare pa­tron­ize your daugh­ter. And she was safe with me, un­til…

“You’re right,” he said, get­ting up. “She is unique. To have tamed and soft­ened you, that’s no ev­ery­day feat. She’s drawn your poi­son, Marisa. She’s tak­en your teeth out. Your fire’s been quenched in a driz­zle of sen­ti­men­tal piety. Who would have thought it? The piti­less agent of the Church, the fa­nat­ical per­se­cu­tor of chil­dren, the in­ven­tor of hideous ma­chines to slice them apart and look in their ter­ri­fied lit­tle be­in­gs for any ev­idence of sin, and along comes a foul­mouthed, ig­no­rant lit­tle brat with dirty fin­ger­nails, and you cluck and set­tle your feath­ers over her like a hen. Well, I ad­mit: the child must have some gift I’ve nev­er seen my­self. But if all it does is turn you in­to a dot­ing moth­er, it’s a pret­ty thin, drab, puny lit­tle gift. And now you might as well be qui­et. I’ve asked my chief com­man­ders to come in for an ur­gent con­fer­ence, and if you can’t con­trol your noise, I’ll have you gagged.”

Mrs. Coul­ter was more like her daugh­ter than she knew. Her an­swer to this was to spit in Lord As­riel’s face. He wiped it calm­ly away and said, “A gag would put an end to that kind of be­hav­ior, too.”

“Oh, do cor­rect me, As­riel,” she said. “Some­one who dis­plays to his un­derof­fi­cers a cap­tive tied to a chair is clear­ly a prince of po­lite­ness. Un­tie me, or I’ll force you to gag me.”

“As you wish,” he said, and took a silk scarf from the draw­er; but be­fore he could tie it around her mouth, she shook her head.

“No, no,” she said, “As­riel, don’t, I beg you, please don’t hu­mil­iate me.”

An­gry tears dashed from her eyes.

“Very well, I’ll un­tie you, but he can stay in his chains,” he said, and dropped the scarf back in the draw­er be­fore cut­ting her bonds with a clasp knife.

She rubbed her wrists, stood up, stretched, and on­ly then no­ticed the con­di­tion of her clothes and hair. She looked hag­gard and pale; the last of the Gal­livespi­an ven­om still re­mained in her body, caus­ing ag­oniz­ing pains in her joints, but she was not go­ing to show him that.

Lord As­riel said, “You can wash in there,” in­di­cat­ing a small room hard­ly big­ger than a clos­et.

She picked up her chained dae­mon, whose bale­ful eyes glared at Lord As­riel over her shoul­der, and went through to make her­self ti­di­er.

The or­der­ly came in to an­nounce:

“His Majesty King Ogun­we and the Lord Roke.”

The African gen­er­al and the Gal­livespi­an came in: King Ogun­we in a clean uni­form, with a wound on his tem­ple fresh­ly dressed, and Lord Roke glid­ing swift­ly to the ta­ble astride his blue hawk.

Lord As­riel greet­ed them warm­ly and of­fered wine. The bird let his rid­er step off, and then flew to the brack­et by the door as the or­der­ly an­nounced the third of Lord As­riel’s high com­man­ders, an an­gel by the name of Xapha­nia. She was of a much high­er rank than Baruch or Balthamos, and vis­ible by a shim­mer­ing, dis­con­cert­ing light that seemed to come from some­where else.

By this time Mrs. Coul­ter had emerged, much ti­died, and all three com­man­ders bowed to her; and if she was sur­prised at their ap­pear­an­ce, she gave no sign, but in­clined her head and sat down peace­ably, hold­ing the pin­ioned mon­key in her arms.

With­out wast­ing time, Lord As­riel said, “Tell me what hap­pened, King Ogun­we.”

The African, pow­er­ful and deep­voiced, said, “We killed sev­en­teen Swiss Guards and de­stroyed two zep­pelins. We lost five men and one gy­ropter. The girl and the boy es­caped. We cap­tured the La­dy Coul­ter, de­spite her coura­geous de­fense, and brought her here. I hope she feels we treat­ed her cour­te­ous­ly.”

“I am quite con­tent with the way you treat­ed me, sir,” she said, with the faintest pos­si­ble stress on the you.

“Any dam­age to the oth­er gy­ropters? Any wound­ed?” said Lord As­riel.

“Some dam­age and some wounds, but all mi­nor.”

“Good. Thank you, King; your force did well. My Lord Roke, what have you heard?”

The Gal­livespi­an said, “My spies are with the boy and girl in an­oth­er world. Both chil­dren are safe and well, though the girl has been kept in a drugged sleep for many days. The boy lost the use of his knife dur­ing the events in the cave: by some ac­ci­dent, it broke in pieces. But it is now whole again, thanks to a crea­ture from the north of your world, Lord As­riel, a gi­ant bear, very skilled at smith­work. As soon as the knife was mend­ed, the boy cut through in­to an­oth­er world, where they are now. My spies are with them, of course, but there is a dif­fi­cul­ty: while the boy has the knife, he can­not be com­pelled to do any­thing; and yet if they were to kill him in his sleep, the knife would be use­less to us. For the time be­ing, the Che­va­li­er Tialys and the La­dy Salmakia will go with them wher­ev­er they go, so at least we can keep track of them. They seem to have a plan in mind; they are re­fus­ing to come here, at any rate. My two will not lose them.”

“Are they safe in this oth­er world they’re in now?” said Lord As­riel.

“They’re on a beach near a for­est of large treeferns. There is no sign of an­imal life near­by. As we speak, both boy and girl are asleep; I spoke to the Che­va­li­er Tialys not five min­utes ago.”

“Thank you,” said Lord As­riel. “Now that your two agents are fol­low­ing the chil­dren, of course, we have no eyes in the Mag­is­teri­um any­more. We shall have to re­ly on the alethiome­ter. At least…

Then Mrs. Coul­ter spoke, to their sur­prise.

“I don’t know about the oth­er branch­es,” she said, “but as far as the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court is con­cerned, the read­er they re­ly on is Fra Pavel Rasek. And he’s thor­ough, but slow. They won’t know where Lyra is for an­oth­er few hours.”

Lord As­riel said, “Thank you, Marisa. Do you have any idea what Lyra and this boy in­tend to do next?”

“No,” she said, “none. I’ve spo­ken to the boy, and he seemed ;.:; to be a stub­born child, and one well used to keep­ing se­crets. I can’t guess what he would do. As for Lyra, she is quite im­pos­si­ble to read.”

“My lord,” said King Ogun­we, “may we know whether the La­dy is now part of this com­mand­ing coun­cil? If so, what is her func­tion? If not, should she not be tak­en else­where?”

“She is our cap­tive and my guest, and as a dis­tin­guished for­mer agent of the Church, she may have in­for­ma­tion that would be use­ful.”

“Will she re­veal any­thing will­ing­ly? Or will she need to be tor­tured?” said Lord Roke, watch­ing her di­rect­ly as he spoke.

Mrs. Coul­ter laughed.

“I would have thought Lord As­riel’s com­man­ders would know bet­ter than to ex­pect truth to come out of tor­ture,” she said.

Lord As­riel couldn’t help en­joy­ing her barefaced in­sin­cer­ity.

“I will guar­an­tee Mrs. Coul­ter’s be­hav­ior,” he said. “She knows what will hap­pen if she be­trays us; though she will not have the chance. How­ev­er, if any of you has a doubt, ex­press it now, fear­less­ly.”

“I do,” said King Ogun­we, “but I doubt you, not her.”

“Why?” said Lord As­riel.

“If she tempt­ed you, you would not re­sist. It was right to cap­ture her, but wrong to in­vite her to this coun­cil. Treat her with ev­ery cour­tesy, give her the great­est com­fort, but place her some­where else, and stay away from her.”

“Well, I in­vit­ed you to speak,” said Lord As­riel, “and I must ac­cept your re­buke. I val­ue your pres­ence more than hers, King. I’ll have her tak­en away.”

He reached for the bell, but be­fore he could ring, Mrs. Coul­ter spoke.

“Please,” she said ur­gent­ly, “lis­ten to me first. I can help. I’ve been clos­er to the heart of the Mag­is­teri­um than any­one you’re like­ly to find again. I know how they think, I can guess what they’ll do. You won­der why you should trust me, what’s made me leave them? It’s sim­ple: they’re go­ing to kill my daugh­ter. They daren’t let her live. The mo­ment I found out who she is, what she is, what the witch­es proph­esy about her, I knew I had to leave the Church; I knew I was their en­emy, and they were mine. I didn’t know what you all were, or what I was to you, that was a mys­tery; but I knew that I had to set my­self against the Church, against ev­ery­thing they be­lieved in, and if need be, against the Au­thor­ity him­self. I…”

She stopped. All the com­man­ders were lis­ten­ing in­tent­ly. Now she looked Lord As­riel full in the face and seemed to speak to him alone, her voice low and pas­sion­ate, her bril­liant eyes glit­ter­ing.

“I have been the worst moth­er in the world. I let my on­ly child be tak­en away from me when she was a tiny in­fant, be­cause I didn’t care about her; I was con­cerned on­ly with my own ad­vance­ment. I didn’t think of her for years, and if I did, it was on­ly to re­gret the em­bar­rass­ment of her birth.

“But then the Church be­gan to take an in­ter­est in Dust and in chil­dren, and some­thing stirred in my heart, and I re­mem­bered that I was a moth­er and Lyra was… my child.

“And be­cause there was a threat, I saved her from it. Three times now I’ve stepped in to pluck her out of dan­ger. First, when the Obla­tion Board be­gan its work: I went to Jor­dan Col­lege and I took her to live with me, in Lon­don, where I could keep her safe from the Board… or so I hoped. But she ran away.

“The sec­ond time was at Bolvan­gar, when I found her just in time, un­der the… un­der the blade of the… My heart near­ly stopped… It was what they, we, what I had done to oth­er chil­dren, but when it was mine… Oh, you can’t con­ceive the hor­ror of that mo­ment, I hope you nev­er suf­fer as I did then… But I got her free; I took her out; I saved her a sec­ond time.

“But even as I did that, I still felt my­self part of the Church, a ser­vant, a loy­al and faith­ful and de­vot­ed ser­vant, be­cause I was do­ing the Au­thor­ity’s work.

“And then I learned the witch­es’ prophe­cy. Lyra will some­how, some­time soon, be tempt­ed, as Eve was, that’s what they say. What form this temp­ta­tion will take, I don’t know, but she’s grow­ing up, af­ter all. It’s not hard to imag­ine. And now that the Church knows that, too, they’ll kill her. If it all de­pends on her, could they risk let­ting her live? Would they dare take the chance that she’d refuse this temp­ta­tion, what­ev­er it will be?

“No, they’re bound to kill her. If they could, they’d go back to the Gar­den of Eden and kill Eve be­fore she was tempt­ed. Killing is not dif­fi­cult for them; Calvin him­self or­dered the deaths of chil­dren; they’d kill her with pomp and cer­emo­ny and prayers and lamen­ta­tions and psalms and hymns, but they would kill her. If she falls in­to their hands, she’s dead al­ready.

“So when I heard what the witch said, I saved my daugh­ter for the third time. I took her to a place where I kept her safe, and there I was go­ing to stay.”

“You drugged her,” said King Ogun­we. “You kept her un­con­scious.”

“I had to,” said Mrs. Coul­ter, “be­cause she hat­ed me,” and here her voice, which had been full of emo­tion but un­der con­trol, spilled over in­to a sob, and it trem­bled as she went on: “She feared me and hat­ed me, and she would have fled from my pres­ence like a bird from a cat if I hadn’t drugged her in­to obliv­ion. Do you know what that means to a moth­er? But it was the on­ly way to keep her safe! All that time in the cave… asleep, her eyes closed, her body help­less, her dae­mon curled up at her throat… Oh, I felt such a love, such a ten­der­ness, such a deep, deep… My own child, the first time I had ev­er been able to do these things for her, my lit­tle…! washed her and fed her and kept her safe and warm, I made sure her body was nour­ished as she slept… I lay be­side her at night, I cra­dled her in my arms, I wept in­to her hair, I kissed her sleep­ing eyes, my lit­tle one…”

She was shame­less. She spoke qui­et­ly; she didn’t de­claim or raise her voice; and when a sob shook her, it was muf­fled al­most in­to a hic­cup, as if she were sti­fling her emo­tions for the sake of cour­tesy. Which made her barefaced lies all the more ef­fec­tive, Lord As­riel thought with dis­gust; she lied in the very mar­row of her bones.

She di­rect­ed her words main­ly at King Ogun­we, with­out seem­ing to, and Lord As­riel saw that, too. Not on­ly was the king her chief ac­cus­er, he was al­so hu­man, un­like the an­gel or Lord Roke, and she knew how to play on him.

In fact, though, it was on the Gal­livespi­an that she made the great­est im­pres­sion. Lord Roke sensed in her a na­ture as close to that of a scor­pi­on as he had ev­er en­coun­tered, and he was well aware of the pow­er in the sting he could de­tect un­der her gen­tle tone. Bet­ter to keep scor­pi­ons where you could see them, he thought.

So he sup­port­ed King Ogun­we when the lat­ter changed his mind and ar­gued that she should stay, and Lord As­riel found him­self out­flanked: for he now want­ed her else­where, but he had al­ready agreed to abide by his com­man­ders’ wish­es.

Mrs. Coul­ter looked at him with an ex­pres­sion of mild and vir­tu­ous con­cern. He was cer­tain that no one else could see the glit­ter of sly tri­umph in the depths of her beau­ti­ful eyes.

“Stay, then,” he said. “But you’ve spo­ken enough. Stay qui­et now. I want to con­sid­er this pro­pos­al for a gar­ri­son on the south­ern bor­der. You’ve all seen the re­port: is it work­able? Is it de­sir­able? Next I want to look at the ar­mory. And then I want to hear from Xapha­nia about the dis­po­si­tions of the an­gel­ic forces. First, the gar­ri­son. King Ogun­we?”

The African lead­er be­gan. They spoke for some time, and Mrs. Coul­ter was im­pressed by their ac­cu­rate knowl­edge of the Church’s de­fens­es, and their clear as­sess­ment of its lead­ers’ strengths.

But now that Tialys and Salmakia were with the chil­dren, and Lord As­riel no longer had a spy in the Mag­is­teri­um, their knowl­edge would soon be dan­ger­ous­ly out of date. An idea came to Mrs. Coul­ter’s mind, and she and the mon­key dae­mon ex­changed a glance that felt like a pow­er­ful an­bar­ic spark; but she said noth­ing, and stroked his gold­en fur as she lis­tened to the com­man­ders.

Then Lord As­riel said, “Enough. That is a prob­lem we’ll deal with lat­er. Now for the ar­mory. I un­der­stand they’re ready to test the in­ten­tion craft. We’ll go and look at it.”

He took a sil­ver key from his pock­et and un­locked the chain around the gold­en mon­key’s feet and hands, and care­ful­ly avoid­ed touch­ing even the tip of one gold­en hair.

Lord Roke mount­ed his hawk and fol­lowed with the oth­ers as Lord As­riel set off down the stairs of the tow­er and out on­to the bat­tle­ments.

A cold wind was blow­ing, snap­ping at their eye­lids, and the dark blue hawk soared up in a mighty draft, wheel­ing and scream­ing in the wild air. King Ogun­we drew his coat around him and rest­ed his hand on his chee­tah dae­mon’s head.

Mrs. Coul­ter said humbly to the an­gel:

“Ex­cuse me, my la­dy: your name is Xapha­nia?”

“Yes,” said the an­gel.

Her ap­pear­an­ce im­pressed Mrs. Coul­ter, just as her fel­lows had im­pressed the witch Ru­ta Ska­di when she found them in the sky: she was not shin­ing, but shone on, though there was no source of light. She was tall, naked, winged, and her lined face was old­er than that of any liv­ing crea­ture Mrs. Coul­ter had ev­er seen.

“Are you one of the an­gels who re­belled so long ago?”

“Yes. And since then I have been wan­der­ing be­tween many worlds. Now I have pledged my al­le­gi­ance to Lord As­riel, be­cause I see in his great en­ter­prise the best hope of de­stroy­ing the tyran­ny at last.”

“But if you fail?”

“Then we shall all be de­stroyed, and cru­el­ty will reign for­ev­er.”

As they spoke, they fol­lowed Lord As­riel’s rapid strides along the wind­beat­en bat­tle­ments to­ward a mighty stair­case go­ing down so deep that even the flar­ing lights on sconces down the walls could not dis­close the bot­tom. Past them swooped the blue hawk, glid­ing down and down in­to the gloom, with each flar­ing light mak­ing his feath­ers flick­er as he passed it, un­til he was mere­ly a tiny spark, and then noth­ing.

The an­gel had moved on to Lord As­riel’s side, and Mrs. Coul­ter found her­self de­scend­ing next to the African king.

“Ex­cuse my ig­no­rance, sir,” she said, “but I had nev­er seen or heard of a be­ing like the man on the blue hawk un­til the fight in the cave yes­ter­day… Where does he come from? Can you tell me about his peo­ple? I wouldn’t of­fend him for the world, but if I speak with­out know­ing some­thing about him, I might be un­in­ten­tion­al­ly rude.”

“You do well to ask,” said King Ogun­we. “His peo­ple are proud. Their world de­vel­oped un­like ours; there are two kinds of con­scious be­ing there, hu­mans and Gal­livespi­ans. The hu­mans are most­ly ser­vants of the Au­thor­ity, and they have been try­ing to ex­ter­mi­nate the small peo­ple since the ear­li­est time any­one can re­mem­ber. They re­gard them as di­abol­ic. So the Gal­livespi­ans still can­not quite trust those who are our size. But they are fierce and proud war­ri­ors, and dead­ly en­emies, and valu­able spies.

“Are all his peo­ple with you, or are they di­vid­ed as hu­mans are?”

“There are some who are with the en­emy, but most are with us.”

“And the an­gels? You know, I thought un­til re­cent­ly that an­gels were an in­ven­tion of the Mid­dle Age; they were just imag­inary…To find your­self speak­ing to one is dis­con­cert­ing, isn’t it…How many are with Lord As­riel?”

“Mrs. Coul­ter,” said the king, “these ques­tions are just the sort of things a spy would want to find out.”

“A fine sort of spy I’d be, to ask you so trans­par­ent­ly,” she replied. “I’m a cap­tive, sir. I couldn’t get away even if I had a safe place to flee to. From now on, I’m harm­less, you can take my word for that.”

“If you say so, I am hap­py to be­lieve you,” said the king. “An­gels are more dif­fi­cult to un­der­stand than any hu­man be­ing. They’re not all of one kind, to be­gin with; some have greater pow­ers than oth­ers; and there are com­pli­cat­ed al­liances among them, and an­cient en­mi­ties, that we know lit­tle about. The Au­thor­ity has been sup­press­ing them since he came in­to be­ing.”

She stopped. She was gen­uine­ly shocked. The African king halt­ed be­side her, think­ing she was un­well, and in­deed the light of the flar­ing sconce above her did throw ghast­ly shad­ows over her face.

“You say that so ca­su­al­ly,” she said, “as if it were some­thing I should know, too, but… How can it be? The Au­thor­ity cre­at­ed the worlds, didn’t he? He ex­ist­ed be­fore ev­ery­thing. How can he have come in­to be­ing?”

“This is an­gel­ic knowl­edge,” said Ogun­we. “It shocked some of us, too, to learn that the Au­thor­ity is not the cre­ator. There may have been a cre­ator, or there may not: we don’t know. All we know is that at some point the Au­thor­ity took charge, and since then, an­gels have re­belled, and hu­man be­in­gs have strug­gled against him, too. This is the last re­bel­li­on. Nev­er be­fore have hu­mans and an­gels, and be­in­gs from all the worlds, made a com­mon cause. This is the great­est force ev­er as­sem­bled. But it may still not be enough. We shall see.”

“But what does Lord As­riel in­tend? What is this world, and why has he come here?”

“He led us here be­cause this world is emp­ty. Emp­ty of con­scious life, that is. We are not co­lo­nial­ists, Mrs. Coul­ter. We haven’t come to con­quer, but to build.”

“And is he go­ing to at­tack the King­dom of Heav­en?”

Ogun­we looked at her lev­el­ly.

“We’re not go­ing to in­vade the King­dom,” he said, “but if the King­dom in­vades us, they had bet­ter be ready for war, be­cause we are pre­pared. Mrs. Coul­ter, I am a king, but it’s my proud­est task to join Lord As­riel in set­ting up a world where there are no king­doms at all. No kings, no bish­ops, no priests. The King­dom of Heav­en has been known by that name since the Au­thor­ity first set him­self above the rest of the an­gels. And we want no part of it. This world is dif­fer­ent. We in­tend to he free cit­izens of the Re­pub­lic of Heav­en.”

Mrs. Coul­ter want­ed to say more, to ask the dozen ques­tions that rose to her lips, but the king had moved on, un­will­ing to keep his com­man­der wait­ing, and she had to fol­low.

The stair­case led so far down that by the time it reached a lev­el floor, the sky be­hind them at the head of the flight was quite in­vis­ible. Well be­fore halfway she had lit­tle breath left, but she made no com­plaint and moved on down till it opened out in­to a mas­sive hall lit by glow­ing crys­tals in the pil­lars that sup­port­ed the roof. Lad­ders, gantries, beams, and walk­ways crossed the gloom above, with small fig­ures mov­ing about them pur­pose­ful­ly.

Lord As­riel was speak­ing to his com­man­ders when Mrs. Coul­ter ar­rived, and with­out wait­ing to let her rest, he moved on across the great hall, where oc­ca­sion­al­ly a bright fig­ure would sweep through the air or alight on the floor for a brief snatched word with him. The air was dense and warm. Mrs. Coul­ter no­ticed that, pre­sum­ably as a cour­tesy to Lord Roke, ev­ery pil­lar had an emp­ty brack­et at hu­man head height so that his hawk could perch there and al­low the Gal­livespi­an to be in­clud­ed in the dis­cus­sion.

But they did not stay in the great hall for long. At the far side, an at­ten­dant hauled open a heavy dou­ble door to let them through, on­to the plat­form of a rail­way. There wait­ing was a small closed car­riage, drawn by an an­bar­ic lo­co­mo­tive.

The en­gi­neer bowed, and his brown mon­key dae­mon re­treat­ed be­hind his legs at the sight of the gold­en mon­key with the chained hands. Lord As­riel spoke to the man briefly and showed the oth­ers in­to the car­riage, which, like the hall, was lit by those glow­ing crys­tals, held on sil­ver brack­ets against mir­rored ma­hogany pan­els.

As soon as Lord As­riel had joined them, the train be­gan to move, glid­ing smooth­ly away from the plat­form and in­to a tun­nel, ac­cel­er­at­ing briskly. On­ly the sound of the wheels on the smooth track gave any idea of their speed.

“Where are we go­ing?” Mrs. Coul­ter asked.

“To the ar­mory,” Lord As­riel said short­ly, and turned away to talk qui­et­ly with the an­gel.

Mrs. Coul­ter said to Lord Roke, “My lord, are your spies al­ways sent out in pairs?”

“Why do you ask?”

“Sim­ple cu­rios­ity. My dae­mon and I found our­selves at a stale­mate when we met them re­cent­ly in that cave, and I was in­trigued to see how well they fought.”

“Why in­trigued? Did you not ex­pect peo­ple of our size to be good fight­ers?”

She looked at him cool­ly, aware of the fe­roc­ity of his pride.

“No,” she said. “I thought we would beat you eas­ily, and you very near­ly beat us. I’m hap­py to ad­mit my mis­take. But do you al­ways fight in pairs?”

“You are a pair, are you not, you and your dae­mon? Did you ex­pect us to con­cede the ad­van­tage?” he said, and his haughty stare, bril­liant­ly clear even in the soft light of the crys­tals, dared her to ask more.

She looked down mod­est­ly and said noth­ing.

Sev­er­al min­utes went past, and Mrs. Coul­ter felt the train tak­ing them down­ward, even deep­er in­to the moun­tain’s heart. She couldn’t guess how far they went, but when at least fif­teen min­utes had gone by, the train be­gan to slow; and present­ly they drew up to a plat­form where the an­bar­ic lights seemed bril­liant af­ter the dark­ness of the tun­nel.

Lord As­riel opened the doors, and they got out in­to an at­mo­sphere so hot and sul­phurladen that Mrs. Coul­ter had to gasp. The air rang with the pound­ing of mighty ham­mers and the clan­gor­ous screech of iron on stone.

An at­ten­dant hauled open the doors lead­ing off the plat­form, and in­stant­ly the noise re­dou­bled and the heat swept over them like a break­ing wave. A blaze of scorch­ing light made them shade their eyes; on­ly Xapha­nia seemed un­af­fect­ed by the on­slaught of sound and light and heat. When her sens­es had ad­just­ed, Mrs. Coul­ter looked around, alive with cu­rios­ity.

She had seen forges, iron­works, man­ufac­to­ries in her own world; the biggest seemed like a vil­lage smithy be­side this. Ham­mers the size of hous­es were lift­ed in a mo­ment to the dis­tant ceil­ing and then hurled down­ward to flat­ten balks of iron the size of tree trunks, pound­ing them flat in a frac­tion of a sec­ond with a blow that made the very moun­tain trem­ble; from a vent in the rocky wall, a riv­er of sul­phurous molten met­al flowed un­til it was cut off by an adamant gate, and the bril­liant seething flood rushed through chan­nels and sluices and over weirs in­to row up­on row of molds, to set­tle and cool in a cloud of evil smoke; gi­gan­tic slic­ing ma­chines and rollers cut and fold­ed and pressed sheets of inchthick iron as if it were tis­sue pa­per, and then those mon­strous ham­mers pound­ed it flat again, lay­er­ing met­al up­on met­al with such force that the dif­fer­ent lay­ers be­came one tougher one, over and over again.

If Iorek Byr­ni­son could have seen this ar­mory, he might have ad­mit­ted that these peo­ple knew some­thing about work­ing with met­al. Mrs. Coul­ter could on­ly look and won­der. It was im­pos­si­ble to speak and be un­der­stood, and no one tried. And now Lord As­riel was ges­tur­ing to the small group to fol­low him along a grat­ed walk­way sus­pend­ed over an even larg­er vault be­low, where min­ers toiled with picks and spades to hack the bright met­als from the moth­er rock.

They passed over the walk­way and down a long rocky cor­ri­dor, where sta­lac­tites hung gleam­ing with strange col­ors and where the pound­ing and grind­ing and ham­mer­ing grad­ual­ly fad­ed. Mrs. Coul­ter could feel a cool breeze on her heat­ed face.

The crys­tals that gave them light were nei­ther mount­ed on sconces nor en­closed in glow­ing pil­lars, but scat­tered loose­ly on the floor, and there were no flar­ing torch­es to add to the heat, so lit­tle by lit­tle the par­ty be­gan to feel cold again; and present­ly they came out, quite sud­den­ly, in­to the night air.

They were at a place where part of the moun­tain had been hacked away, mak­ing a space as wide and open as a pa­rade ground. Far­ther along they could see, dim­ly lit, great iron doors in the moun­tain­side, some open and some shut; and from out of one of the mighty door­ways, men were haul­ing some­thing draped in a tarpaulin.

“What is that?” Mrs. Coul­ter said to the African king, and he replied:

“The in­ten­tion craft.”

Mrs. Coul­ter had no idea what that could mean, and watched with in­tense cu­rios­ity as they pre­pared to take off the tarpaulin.

She stood close to King Ogun­we, as if for shel­ter, and said, “How does it work? What does it do?”

“We’re about to see,” said the king.

It looked like some kind of com­plex drilling ap­pa­ra­tus, or the cock­pit of a gy­ropter, or the cab­in of a mas­sive crane. It had a glass canopy over a seat with at least a dozen levers and han­dles banked in front of it. It stood on six legs, each joint­ed and sprung at a dif­fer­ent an­gle to the body, so that it seemed both en­er­get­ic and un­gain­ly; and the body it­self was a mass of pipe work, cylin­ders, pis­tons, coiled ca­bles, switchgear, valves, and gauges. It was hard to tell what was struc­ture and what was not, be­cause it was on­ly lit from be­hind, and most of it was hid­den in gloom.

Lord Roke on his hawk had glid­ed up to it di­rect­ly, cir­cling above, ex­am­in­ing it from all sides. Lord As­riel and the an­gel were close in dis­cus­sion with the en­gi­neers, and men were clam­ber­ing down from the craft it­self, one car­ry­ing a clip­board, an­oth­er a length of ca­ble.

Mrs. Coul­ter’s eyes gazed at the craft hun­gri­ly, mem­oriz­ing ev­ery part of it, mak­ing sense of its com­plex­ity. And as she watched, Lord As­riel swung him­self up in­to the seat, fas­ten­ing a leather har­ness around his waist and shoul­ders, and set­ting a hel­met se­cure­ly on his head. His dae­mon, the snow leop­ard, sprang up to fol­low him, and he turned to ad­just some­thing be­side her. The en­gi­neer called up, Lord As­riel replied, and the men with­drew to the door­way.

The in­ten­tion craft moved, though Mrs. Coul­ter was not sure how. It was al­most as if it had quiv­ered, though there it was, quite still, poised with a strange en­er­gy on those six in­sect legs. As she looked, it moved again, and then she saw what was hap­pen­ing: var­ious parts of it were re­volv­ing, turn­ing this way and that, scan­ning the dark sky over­head. Lord As­riel sat busi­ly mov­ing this lever, check­ing that di­al, ad­just­ing that con­trol; and then sud­den­ly the in­ten­tion craft van­ished.

Some­how, it had sprung in­to the air. It was hov­er­ing above them now, as high as a tree­top, turn­ing slow­ly to the left. There was no sound of an en­gine, no hint of how it was held against grav­ity. It sim­ply hung in the air.

“Lis­ten,” said King Ogun­we. “To the south.”

She turned her head and strained to hear. There was a wind that moaned around the edge of the moun­tain, and there were the deep ham­mer blows from the press­es, which she felt through the soles of her feet, and there was the sound of voic­es from the lit door­way, but at some sig­nal the voic­es stopped and the lights were ex­tin­guished. And in the qui­et Mrs. Coul­ter could hear, very faint­ly, the chop­chop­chop of gy­ropter en­gines on the gusts of wind.

“Who are they?” she said qui­et­ly.

“De­coys,” said the king. “My pi­lots, fly­ing a mis­sion to tempt the en­emy to fol­low. Watch.”

She widened her eyes, try­ing to see any­thing against the heavy dark with its few stars. Above them, the in­ten­tion craft hung as firm­ly as if it were an­chored and bolt­ed there; no gust of wind had the slight­est ef­fect on it. No light came from the cock­pit, so it was very dif­fi­cult to see, and the fig­ure of Lord As­riel was out of sight com­plete­ly.

Then she caught the first sight of a group of lights low in the sky, at the same mo­ment as the en­gine sound be­came loud enough to hear stea­di­ly. Six gy­ropters, fly­ing fast, one of them seem­ing­ly in trou­ble, for smoke trailed from it, and it flew low­er than the oth­ers. They were mak­ing for the moun­tain, but on a course to take them past it and be­yond.

And be­hind them, in close pur­suit, came a mot­ley col­lec­tion of fliers. It was not easy to make out what they were, but Mrs. Coul­ter saw a heavy gy­ropter of a strange kind, two straightwinged air­craft, one great bird that glid­ed with ef­fort­less speed car­ry­ing two armed rid­ers, and three or four an­gels.

“A raid­ing par­ty,” said King Ogun­we.

They were clos­ing on the gy­ropters. Then a line of light blazed from one of the straightwinged air­craft, fol­lowed a sec­ond or two lat­er by a sound, a deep crack. But the shell nev­er reached its tar­get, the crip­pled gy­ropter, be­cause in the same in­stant as they saw the light, and be­fore they heard the crack, the watch­ers on the moun­tain saw a flash from the in­ten­tion craft, and a shell ex­plod­ed in midair.

Mrs. Coul­ter had hard­ly time to un­der­stand that al­most in­stan­ta­neous se­quence of light and sound be­fore the bat­tle was un­der way. Nor was it at all easy to fol­low, be­cause the sky was so dark and the move­ment of ev­ery fli­er so quick; but a se­ries of near­ly silent flash­es lit the moun­tain­side, ac­com­pa­nied by short hiss­es like the es­cape of steam. Each flash struck some­how at a dif­fer­ent raider: the air­craft caught fire or ex­plod­ed; the gi­ant bird ut­tered a scream like the tear­ing of a moun­tain­high cur­tain and plum­met­ed on­to the rocks far be­low; and as for the an­gels, each of them sim­ply van­ished in a drift of glow­ing air, a myr­iad par­ti­cles twin­kling and glow­ing dim­mer un­til they flick­ered out like a dy­ing fire­work.

Then there was si­lence. The wind car­ried away the sound of the de­coy gy­ropters, which had now dis­ap­peared around the flank of the moun­tain, and no one watch­ing spoke. Flames far be­low glared on the un­der­side of the in­ten­tion craft, still some­how hov­er­ing in the air and now turn­ing slow­ly as if to look around. The de­struc­tion of the raid­ing par­ty was so com­plete that Mrs. Coul­ter, who had seen many things to be shocked by, was nev­er­the­less shocked by this. As she looked up at the in­ten­tion craft, it seemed to shim­mer or dis­lodge it­self, and then there it was, sol­id­ly on the ground again.

King Ogun­we hur­ried for­ward, as did the oth­er com­man­ders and the en­gi­neers, who had thrown open the doors and let the light flood out over the prov­ing ground. Mrs. Coul­ter stayed where she was, puz­zling over the work­in­gs of the in­ten­tion craft.

“Why is he show­ing it to us?” her dae­mon said qui­et­ly.

“Sure­ly he can’t have read our mind,” she replied in the same tone.

They were think­ing of the mo­ment in the adamant tow­er when that spark­like idea had flashed be­tween them. They had thought of mak­ing Lord As­riel a propo­si­tion: of of­fer­ing to go to the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline and spy­ing for him. She knew ev­ery lever of pow­er; she could ma­nip­ulate them all. It would be hard at first to con­vince them of her good faith, but she could do it. And now that the Gal­livespi­an spies had left to go with Will and Lyra, sure­ly As­riel couldn’t re­sist an of­fer like that.

But now, as they looked at that strange fly­ing ma­chine, an­oth­er idea struck even more forcibly, and she hugged the gold­en mon­key with glee.

“As­riel,” she called in­no­cent­ly, “may I see how the ma­chine works?”

He looked down, his ex­pres­sion dis­tract­ed and im­pa­tient, but full of ex­cit­ed sat­is­fac­tion, too. He was de­light­ed with the in­ten­tion craft; she knew he wouldn’t be able to re­sist show­ing it off.

King Ogun­we stood aside, and Lord As­riel reached down and pulled her up in­to the cock­pit. He helped her in­to the seat and watched as she looked around the con­trols.

“How does it work? What pow­ers it?” she said.

“Your in­ten­tions,” he said. “Hence the name. If you in­tend to go for­ward, it will go for­ward.”

“That’s no an­swer. Come on, tell me. What sort of en­gine is it? How does it fly? I couldn’t see any­thing aero­dy­nam­ic at all. But these con­trols.. .from in­side, it’s al­most like a gy­ropter.”

He was find­ing it hard not to tell her; and since she was in his pow­er, he did. He held out a ca­ble at the end of which was a leather grip, deeply marked by his dae­mon’s teeth.

“Your de­mean,” he ex­plained, “has to hold this han­dle, whether in teeth, or hands, it doesn’t mat­ter. And you have to wear that hel­met. There’s a cur­rent flow­ing be­tween them, and a ca­pac­itor am­pli­fies it, oh, it’s more com­pli­cat­ed than that, but the thing’s sim­ple to fly. We put in con­trols like a gy­ropter for the sake of fa­mil­iar­ity, but even­tu­al­ly we won’t need con­trols at all. Of course, on­ly a hu­man with a dae­mon can fly it.”

“I see,” she said.

And she pushed him hard, so that he fell out of the ma­chine.

In the same mo­ment she slipped the hel­met on her head, and the gold­en mon­key snatched up the leather han­dle. She reached for the con­trol that in a gy­ropter would tilt the air’ foil, and pushed the throt­tle for­ward, and at once the in­ten­tion craft leapt in­to the air.

But she didn’t quite have the mea­sure of it yet. The craft hung still for some mo­ments, slight­ly tilt­ed, be­fore she found the con­trols to move it for­ward, and in those few sec­onds, Lord As­riel did three things. He leapt to his feet; he put up his hand to stop King Ogun­we from or­der­ing the sol­diers to fire on the in­ten­tion craft; and he said, “Lord Roke, go with her, if you would be so kind.”

The Gal­livespi­an urged his blue hawk up­ward at once, and the bird flew straight to the stil­lopen cab­in door. The ‘”‘ watch­ers be­low could see the wom­an’s head look­ing this way and that, and the gold­en mon­key, like­wise, and they could see that nei­ther of them no­ticed the lit­tle fig­ure of Lord Roke leap­ing from his hawk in­to the cab­in be­hind them.

A mo­ment lat­er, the in­ten­tion craft be­gan to move, and the hawk wheeled away to skim down to Lord As­riel’s wrist. No more than two sec­onds lat­er, the air­craft was al­ready van­ish­ing from sight in the damp and star­ry air.

Lord As­riel watched with rue­ful ad­mi­ra­tion.

“Well, King, you were quite right,” he said, “and I should have lis­tened to you in the first place. She is Lyra’s moth­er; I might have ex­pect­ed some­thing like that.”

“Aren’t you go­ing to pur­sue her?”‘ said King Ogun­we.

“What, and de­stroy a per­fect­ly good air­craft? Cer­tain­ly not.”

“Where d’you think she’ll go? In search of the child?”

“Not at first. She doesn’t know where to find her. I know ex­act­ly what she’ll do: she’ll go to the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court and give them the in­ten­tion craft as an earnest pledge of good faith, and then she’ll spy. She’ll spy on them for us.

She’s tried ev­ery oth­er kind of du­plic­ity: that one’ll be a nov­el ex­pe­ri­ence. And as soon as she finds out where the girl is, she’ll go there, and we shall fol­low.”

“And when will Lord Roke let her know he’s come with her?”

“Oh, I think he’ll keep that as a sur­prise, don’t you?” They laughed, and moved back in­to the work­shops, where a lat­er, more ad­vanced mod­el of the in­ten­tion craft was await­ing their in­spec­tion.





The Amber Spyglass





SEVENTEEN - OIL AND LACQUER


Mary Mal­one was con­struct­ing a mir­ror. Not out of van­ity, for she had lit­tle of that, but be­cause she want­ed to test an idea she had. She want­ed to try and catch Shad­ows, and with­out the in­stru­ments in her lab­ora­to­ry she had to im­pro­vise with the ma­te­ri­als at hand.

Mule­fa tech­nol­ogy had lit­tle use for met­al. They did ex­traor­di­nary things with stone and wood and cord and shell and horn, but what met­als they had were ham­mered from na­tive nuggets of cop­per and oth­er met­als that they found in the sand of the riv­er, and they were nev­er used for tool­mak­ing. They were or­na­men­tal. Mule­fa cou­ples, for ex­am­ple, on en­ter­ing mar­riage, would ex­change strips of bright cop­per, which were bent around the base of one of their horns with much the same mean­ing as a wed­ding ring.

So they were fas­ci­nat­ed by the Swiss Army knife that was Mary’s most valu­able pos­ses­sion.

Atal, the za­tif who was her par­tic­ular friend, ex­claimed with as­ton­ish­ment one day when Mary un­fold­ed the knife and showed her all the parts, and ex­plained as well as she could, with her lim­it­ed lan­guage, what they were for. One at­tach­ment was a minia­ture mag­ni­fy­ing glass, with which she be­gan to burn a de­sign on­to a dry branch, and it was that which set her think­ing about Shad­ows.

They were fish­ing at the time, but the riv­er was low and the fish must have been else­where, so they let the net lie across the wa­ter and sat on the grassy bank and talked, un­til Mary saw the dry branch, which had a smooth white sur­face. She burned the de­sign, a sim­ple daisy, in­to the wood, and de­light­ed Atal; but as the thin line of smoke waft­ed up from the spot where the fo­cused sun­light touched the wood, Mary thought: If this be­came fos­silized, and a sci­en­tist in ten mil­li­on years found it, they could still find Shad­ows around it, be­cause I’ve worked on it.

She drift­ed in­to a sun­doped rev­er­ie un­til Atal asked:

What are you dream­ing?

Mary tried to ex­plain about her work, her re­search, the lab­ora­to­ry, the dis­cov­ery of shad­ow par­ti­cles, the fan­tas­ti­cal rev­ela­tion that they were con­scious, and found the whole tale grip­ping her again, so that she longed to be back among her equip­ment.

She didn’t ex­pect Atal to fol­low her ex­pla­na­tion, part­ly be­cause of her own im­per­fect com­mand of their lan­guage, but part­ly be­cause the mule­fa seemed so prac­ti­cal, so strong­ly root­ed in the phys­ical ev­ery­day world, and much of what she was say­ing was math­emat­ical; but Atal sur­prised her by say­ing,

Yes, we. know what you mean, we call it… and then she used a word that sound­ed like their word for light.

Mary said, Light?

Atal said, Not light, but… and said the word more slow­ly for Mary to catch, ex­plain­ing: like the light on wa­ter when it makes small rip­ples, at sun­set, and the light comes off in bright flakes, we call it that, but it is a make­like.

Make­like was their term for metaphor, Mary had dis­cov­ered.

So she said, It is not re­al­ty light, but you see it and it looks like that light on wa­ter at sun­set?

Atal said, Yes. All the mule­fa have this. You have, too. That is how we knew you were like us and not like the graz­ers, who don’t have it. Even though you look so bizarre and hor­ri­ble, you are like us, be­cause you have , and again came that word that Mary couldn’t hear quite clear­ly enough to say: some­thing like sraf, or sarf, ac­com­pa­nied by a left­ward flick of the trunk.

Mary was ex­cit­ed. She had to keep her­self calm enough to find the right words.

What do you know about it! Where does it come from?

From us, and from the oil, was Atal’s re­ply, and Mary knew she meant the oil in the great seed­pod wheels.

From you?

When we have grown up. But with­out the trees it would just van­ish again. With the wheels and the oil, it stays among us.

When we have grown up… Again Mary had to keep her­self from be­com­ing in­co­her­ent. One of the things she’d be­gun to sus­pect about Shad­ows was that chil­dren and adults re­act­ed to them dif­fer­ent­ly, or at­tract­ed dif­fer­ent kinds of Shad­ow ac­tiv­ity. Hadn’t Lyra said that the sci­en­tists in her world had dis­cov­ered some­thing like that about Dust, which was their name for Shad­ows? Here it was again.

And it was con­nect­ed to what the Shad­ows had said to her on the com­put­er screen just be­fore she’d left her own world: what­ev­er it was, this ques­tion, it had to do with the great change in hu­man his­to­ry sym­bol­ized in the sto­ry of Adam and Eve; with the Temp­ta­tion, the Fall, Orig­in­al Sin. In his in­ves­ti­ga­tions among fos­sil skulls, her col­league Oliv­er Payne had dis­cov­ered that around thir­ty thou­sand years ago a great in­crease had tak­en place in the num­ber of shad­ow par­ti­cles as­so­ci­at­ed with hu­man re­mains. Some­thing had hap­pened then, some de­vel­op­ment in evo­lu­tion, to make the hu­man brain an ide­al chan­nel for am­pli­fy­ing their ef­fects.

She said to Atal:

How long have there been mule­fa.

And Atal said:

Thir­tythree thou­sand years.

She was able to read Mary’s ex­pres­sions by this time, or the most ob­vi­ous of them at least, and she laughed at the way Mary’s jaw dropped. The mule­fa’s laugh­ter was free and joy­ful and so in­fec­tious that Mary usu­al­ly had to join in, but now she re­mained se­ri­ous and as­tound­ed and said:

How can you know so ex­act­ly? Do you have a his­to­ry of all those years?

Oh yes, said Atal. Ev­er since we have had the sraf, we have had mem­ory and wake­ful­ness. Be­fore that, we re­mem­bered noth­ing.

What hap­pened to give you the sraf?

We dis­cov­ered how to use the wheels. One day a crea­ture with no name dis­cov­ered a seed­pod and be­gan to play, and as she played she…

She?

She, yes. She had no name be­fore then. She saw a snake coil­ing it­self through the hole in a seed­pod, and the snake said…

The snake spoke to her?

No, no! It is a make­like. The sto­ry tells that the snake said, “What do you know? What do you re­mem­ber? What do you see ahead?” And she said, “Noth­ing, noth­ing, noth­ing.” So the snake said, “Put your foot through the hole in the seed­pod where I was play­ing, and you will be­come wise.” So she put a foot in where the snake had been. And the oil en­tered her blood and helped her see more clear­ly than be­fore, and the first thing she saw was the sraf. It was so strange and pleas­ant that she want­ed to share it at once with her kin­dred. So she and her mate took the seed­pods, and they dis­cov­ered that they knew who they were, they knew they were mule­fa and not graz­ers. They gave each oth­er names. They named them­selves mule­fa. They named the seed tree, and all the crea­tures and plants.

Be­cause they were dif­fer­ent, said Mary.

Yes, they were. And so were their chil­dren, be­cause as more seed­pods fell, they showed their chil­dren how to use them. And when the chil­dren were old enough to ride the wheels, they be­gan to gen­er­ate the sraf as well, and the sraf came back with the oil and stayed with them. So they saw that they had to plant more seed­pod trees for the sake of the oil, but the pods were so hard that they sel­dom ger­mi­nat­ed. So the first mule­fa saw what they must do to help the trees, which was to ride on the wheels and break them, so mule­fa and seed­pod trees have al­ways lived to­geth­er.

Mary di­rect­ly un­der­stood about a quar­ter of what Atal was say­ing, but by ques­tion­ing and guess­ing she found out the rest quite ac­cu­rate­ly; and her own com­mand of the lan­guage was in­creas­ing all the time. The more she learned, though, the more dif­fi­cult it be­came, as each new thing she found out sug­gest­ed half a dozen ques­tions, each lead­ing in a dif­fer­ent di­rec­tion.

But she pulled her mind af­ter the sub­ject of sraf, be­cause that was the biggest; and that was why she thought about the mir­ror.

It was the com­par­ison of sraf to the sparkles on wa­ter that sug­gest­ed it. Re­flect­ed light like the glare off the sea was po­lar­ized; it might be that the shad­ow par­ti­cles, when they be­haved like waves as light did, were ca­pa­ble of be­ing po­lar­ized, too.

I can’t see sraf as you can, she said, but I would like to make a mir­ror out of the sap lac­quer, be­cause I think that might help me see it.

Atal was ex­cit­ed by this idea, and they hauled in their net at once and be­gan to gath­er what Mary need­ed. As a to­ken of good luck there were three fine fish in the net.

The sap lac­quer was a prod­uct of an­oth­er and much small­er tree, which the mule­fa cul­ti­vat­ed for that pur­pose. By boil­ing the sap and dis­solv­ing it in the al­co­hol they made from dis­tilled fruit juice, the mule­fa made a sub­stance like milk in con­sis­ten­cy, and del­icate am­ber in col­or, which they used as a var­nish. They would put up to twen­ty coats on a base of wood or shell, let­ting each one cure un­der wet cloth be­fore ap­ply­ing the next, and grad­ual­ly build up a sur­face of great hard­ness and bril­liance. They would usu­al­ly make it opaque with var­ious ox­ides, but some­times they left it trans­par­ent, and that was what had in­ter­est­ed Mary: be­cause the clear am­bercol­ored lac­quer had the same cu­ri­ous prop­er­ty as the min­er­al known as Ice­land spar. It split light rays in two, so that when you looked through it you saw dou­ble.

She wasn’t sure what she want­ed to do, ex­cept that she knew that if she fooled around for long enough, with­out fret­ting, or nag­ging her­self, she’d find out. She re­mem­bered quot­ing the words of the po­et Keats to Lyra, and Lyra’s un­der­stand­ing at once that that was her own state of mind when she read the alethiome­ter, that was what Mary had to find now.

So she be­gan by find­ing her­self a more or less flat piece of a wood like pine, and grind­ing at the sur­face with a piece of sand­stone (no met­al: no planes) un­til it was as flat as she could make it. That was the method the mule­fa used, and it worked well enough, with time and ef­fort.

Then she vis­it­ed the lac­quer grove with Atal, hav­ing care­ful­ly ex­plained what she was in­tend­ing, and asked per­mis­sion to take some sap. The mule­fa were hap­py to let her, but too busy to be con­cerned. With Atal’s help she drew off some of the sticky, resinous sap, and then came the long pro­cess of boil­ing, dis­solv­ing, boil­ing again, un­til the var­nish was ready to use.

The mule­fa used pads of a cot­tony fiber from an­oth­er plant to ap­ply it, and fol­low­ing the in­struc­tions of a crafts­man, she la­bo­ri­ous­ly paint­ed her mir­ror over and over again, see­ing hard­ly any dif­fer­ence each time as the lay­er of lac­quer was so thin, but let­ting it cure un­hur­ried­ly and find­ing grad­ual­ly that the thick­ness was build­ing up. She paint­ed on over forty coats, she lost count, but by the time her lac­quer had run out, the sur­face was at least five mil­lime­ters thick.

Af­ter the fi­nal lay­er came the pol­ish­ing: a whole day of rub­bing the sur­face gen­tly, in smooth cir­cu­lar move­ments, un­til her arms ached and her head was throb­bing and she could bear the la­bor no more.

Then she slept.

Next morn­ing the group went to work in a cop­pice of what they called knot wood, mak­ing sure the shoots were grow­ing as they had been set, tight­en­ing the in­ter­weav­ing so that the grown sticks would be prop­er­ly shaped. They val­ued Mary’s help for this task, as she on her own could squeeze in­to nar­row­er gaps than the mule­fa, and, with her dou­ble hands, work in tighter spaces.

It was on­ly when that work was done, and they had re­turned to the set­tle­ment, that Mary could be­gin to ex­per­iment, or rather to play, since she still didn’t have a clear idea of what she was do­ing.

First she tried us­ing the lac­quer sheet sim­ply as a mir­ror, but for lack of a sil­vered back, all she could see was a dou­bled re­flec­tion faint­ly in the wood.

Then she thought that what she re­al­ly need­ed was the lac­quer with­out the wood, but she quailed at the idea of mak­ing an­oth­er sheet; how could she make it flat with­out a back­ing any­way?

The idea came of sim­ply cut­ting the wood away to leave the lac­quer. That would take time, too, but at least she had the Swiss Army knife. And she be­gan, split­ting it very del­icate­ly from the edge, tak­ing the great­est of care not to scratch the lac­quer from be­hind, but even­tu­al­ly re­mov­ing most of the pine and leav­ing a mess of torn and splin­tered wood stuck im­mov­ably to the pane of clear, hard var­nish.

She won­dered what would hap­pen if she soaked it in wa­ter. Did the lac­quer soft­en if it got wet? No, said her mas­ter in the craft, it will re­main hard for­ev­er; but why not do it like this? And he showed her a liq­uid kept in a stone bowl, which would eat through any wood in on­ly a few hours. It looked and smelled to Mary like an acid.

That would hurt the lac­quer hard­ly at all, he said, and she could re­pair any dam­age eas­ily enough. He was in­trigued by her project and helped her to swab the acid del­icate­ly on­to the wood, telling her how they made it by grind­ing and dis­solv­ing and dis­till­ing a min­er­al they found at the edge of some shal­low lakes she had not yet vis­it­ed. Grad­ual­ly the wood soft­ened and came free, and Mary was left with the sin­gle sheet of clear brownyel­low lac­quer, about the size of a page from a pa­per­back book.

She pol­ished the re­verse as high­ly as the top, un­til both were as flat and smooth as the finest mir­ror.

And when she looked through it…

Noth­ing in par­tic­ular. It was per­fect­ly clear, but it showed her a dou­ble im­age, the right one quite close to the left and about fif­teen de­grees up­ward.

She won­dered what would hap­pen if she looked through two pieces, one on top of the oth­er.

So she took the Swiss Army knife again and tried to score a line across the sheet so she could cut it in two. By work­ing and re­work­ing, and by keep­ing the knife sharp on a smooth stone, she man­aged to score a line deep enough for her to risk snap­ping the sheet. She laid a thin stick un­der the score line and pushed sharply down on the lac­quer, as she’d seen a glazier cut­ting glass, and it worked: now she had two sheets.

She put them to­geth­er and looked through. The am­ber col­or was denser, and like a pho­to­graph­ic fil­ter it em­pha­sized some col­ors and held back oth­ers, giv­ing a slight­ly dif­fer­ent cast to the land­scape. The cu­ri­ous thing was that the dou­ble­ness had dis­ap­peared, and ev­ery­thing was sin­gle again; but there was no sign of Shad­ows.

She moved the two pieces apart, watch­ing how the ap­pear­an­ce of things changed as she did so. When they were about a hand span apart, a cu­ri­ous thing hap­pened: the am­ber col­or­ing dis­ap­peared, and ev­ery­thing seemed its nor­mal col­or, but brighter and more vivid.

At that point Atal came along to see what she was do­ing.

Can you see sraf now? she said.

No, but I can see oth­er things, Mary said, and tried to show her.

Atal was in­ter­est­ed, but po­lite­ly, not with the sense of dis­cov­ery that was an­imat­ing Mary, and present­ly the za­lif tired of look­ing through the small pieces of lac­quer and set­tled down on the grass to main­tain her wheels and claws. Some­times the mule­fa would groom each oth­er’s claws, out of pure so­cia­bil­ity, and once or twice Atal had in­vit­ed Mary to at­tend to hers. Mary, in turn, let Atal tidy her hair, en­joy­ing how the soft trunk lift­ed it and let it fall, stroking and mas­sag­ing her scalp.

She sensed that Atal want­ed this now, so she put down the two pieces of lac­quer and ran her hands over the as­ton­ish­ing smooth­ness of Atal’s claws, that sur­face smoother and slick­er than Teflon that rest­ed on the low­er rim of the cen­tral hole and served as a bear­ing when the wheel turned. The con­tours matched ex­act­ly, of course, and as Mary ran her hands around the in­side of the wheel, she could feel no dif­fer­ence in tex­ture: it was as if the mule­fa and the seed­pod re­al­ly were one crea­ture, which by a mir­acle could dis­as­sem­ble it­self and put it­self to­geth­er again.

Atal was soothed, and so was Mary, by this con­tact. Her friend was young and un­mar­ried, and there were no young males in this group, so she would have to mar­ry a za­lif from out­side; but con­tact wasn’t easy, and some­times Mary thought that Atal was anx­ious about her fu­ture. So she didn’t be­grudge the time she spent with her, and now she was hap­py to clean the wheel holes of all the dust and grime that ac­cu­mu­lat­ed there, and smooth the fra­grant oil gen­tly over her friend’s claws while Atal’s trunk lift­ed and straight­ened her hair.

When Atal had had enough, she set her­self on the wheels again and moved away to help with the evening meal. Mary turned back to her lac­quer, and al­most at once she made her dis­cov­ery.

She held the two plates a hand span apart so that they showed that clear, bright im­age she’d seen be­fore, but some­thing had hap­pened.

As she looked through, she saw a swarm of gold­en sparkles sur­round­ing the form of Atal. They were on­ly vis­ible through one small part of the lac­quer, and then Mary re­al­ized why: at that point she had touched the sur­face of it with her oily fin­gers.

Atal, she called. Quick! Come back!

Atal turned and wheeled back.

Let me take a lit­tle oil, Mary said, just enough to put on the lac­quer.

Atal will­ing­ly let her run her fin­gers around the wheel holes again, and watched cu­ri­ous­ly as Mary coat­ed one of the pieces with a film of the clear, sweet sub­stance.

Then she pressed the plates to­geth­er and moved them around to spread the oil even­ly, and held them a hand span apart once more.

And when she looked through, ev­ery­thing was changed. She could see Shad­ows. If she’d been in the Jor­dan Col­lege Re­tir­ing Room when Lord As­riel had pro­ject­ed the pho­tograms he’d made with the spe­cial emul­sion, she would have rec­og­nized the ef­fect. Ev­ery­where she looked she could see gold, just as Atal had de­scribed it: sparkles of light, float­ing and drift­ing and some­times mov­ing in a cur­rent of pur­pose. Among it all was the world she could see with the naked eye, the grass, the riv­er, the trees; but wher­ev­er she saw a con­scious be­ing, one of the mule­fa, the light was thick­er and more full of move­ment. It didn’t ob­scure their shapes in any way; if any­thing it made them clear­er.

I didn’t know it was beau­ti­ful, Mary said to Atal.

Why, of course it is, her friend replied. It is strange to think that you couldn’t see it. Look at the lit­tle one…

She in­di­cat­ed one of the small chil­dren play­ing in the long grass, leap­ing clum­si­ly af­ter grasshop­pers, sud­den­ly stop­ping to ex­am­ine a leaf, falling over, scram­bling up again to rush and tell his moth­er some­thing, be­ing dis­tract­ed again by a piece of stick, try­ing to pick it up, find­ing ants on his trunk and hoot­ing with ag­ita­tion. There was a gold­en haze around him, as there was around the shel­ters, the fish­ing nets, the evening fire: stronger than theirs, though not by much. But un­like theirs it was full of lit­tle swirling cur­rents of in­ten­tion that ed­died and broke off and drift­ed about, to dis­ap­pear as new ones were born.

Around his moth­er, on the oth­er hand, the gold­en sparkles were much stronger, and the cur­rents they moved in were more set­tled and pow­er­ful. She was prepar­ing food, spread­ing flour on a flat stone, mak­ing the thin bread like cha­patis or tor­tillas, watch­ing her child at the same time; and the Shad­ows, or the sraf, or the Dust, that bathed her looked like the very im­age of re­spon­si­bil­ity and wise care.

So at last you can see, said Atal. Well, now you must come with me.

Mary looked at her friend in puz­zle­ment. Atals tone was strange: it was as if she were say­ing, Fi­nal­ly you’re ready; we’ve been wait­ing; now things must change.

And oth­ers were ap­pear­ing, from over the brow of the hill, from out of their shel­ters, from along the riv­er: mem­bers of the group, but strangers, too, mule­fa who were new to her, and who looked cu­ri­ous­ly to­ward where she was stand­ing. The sound of their wheels on the hard­packed earth was low and steady.

Where must I go? Mary said. Why are they all com­ing here?

Don’t wor­ry, said Atal, come with me, we shall not hurt you.

It seemed to have been long planned, this meet­ing, for they all knew where to go and what to ex­pect. There was a low mound at the edge of the vil­lage that was reg­ular in shape and packed with hard earth, with ramps at each end, and the crowd, fifty or so at least, Mary es­ti­mat­ed, was mov­ing to­ward it. The smoke of the cook­ing fires hung in the evening air, and the set­ting sun spread its own kind of hazy gold over ev­ery­thing. Mary was aware of the smell of roast­ing corn, and the warm smell of the mule­fa them­selves, part oil, part warm flesh, a sweet horse­like smell.

Atal urged her to­ward the mound.

Mary said, What is hap­pen­ing? Tell me!

No, no… Not me. Sat­ta­max will speak…

Mary didn’t know the name Sat­ta­max, and the za­lif whom Atal in­di­cat­ed was a stranger to her. He was old­er than any­one she’d seen so far: at the base of his trunk was a scat­ter of white hairs, and he moved stiffly, as if he had arthri­tis. The oth­ers all moved with care around him, and when Mary stole a glance through the lac­quer glass, she saw why: the old za­lif’s, Shad­ow cloud was so rich and com­plex that Mary her­self felt re­spect, even though she knew so lit­tle of what it meant.

When Sat­ta­max was ready to speak, the rest of the crowd fell silent. Mary stood close to the mound, with Atal near­by for re­as­sur­an­ce; but she sensed all their eyes on her and felt as if she were a new girl at school.

Sat­ta­max be­gan to speak. His voice was deep, the tones rich and var­ied, the ges­tures of his trunk low and grace­ful.

We have all come to­geth­er to greet the stranger Mary. Those of us who know her have rea­son to be grate­ful for her ac­tiv­ities since she ar­rived among us. We have wait­ed un­til she had some com­mand of our lan­guage. With the help of many of us, but es­pe­cial­ly the za­lif Atal, the stranger Mary can now un­der­stand us.

But there was an­oth­er thing she had to un­der­stand, and that was sraf. She knew about it, but she could not see it as we can, un­til she made an in­stru­ment to look through.

And now she has suc­ceed­ed, she is ready to learn more about what she must do to help us.

Mary, come here and join me.

She felt dizzy, self­con­scious, be­mused, but she did as she had to and stepped up be­side the old za­lif. She thought she had bet­ter speak, so she be­gan:

You have all made me feel I am a friend. You are kind and hos­pitable. I came from a world where life is very dif­fer­ent, but some of us are aware of sraf, as you are, and I’m grate­ful for your help in mak­ing this glass, through which I can see it. If there is any way in which I can help you, I will be glad to do it.

She spoke more awk­ward­ly than she did with Atal, and she was afraid she hadn’t made her mean­ing clear. It was hard to know where to face when you had to ges­ture as well as speak, but they seemed to un­der­stand.

Sat­ta­max said, It is good to hear you speak. We hope you will be able to help us. If not, I can­not see how we will sur­vive. The tu­alapi will kill us all. There are more of them than there ev­er were, and their num­bers are in­creas­ing ev­ery year. Some­thing has gone wrong with the world. For most of the thir­tythree thou­sand years that there have been mule­fa, we have tak­en care of the earth. Ev­ery­thing bal­an­ced. The trees pros­pered, the graz­ers were healthy, and even if once in a while the tu­alapi came, our num­bers and theirs re­mained con­stant.

But three hun­dred years ago the trees be­gan to sick­en. We watched them anx­ious­ly and tend­ed them with care and still we found them pro­duc­ing few­er seed­pods, and drop­ping their leaves out of sea­son, and some of them died out­right, which had nev­er been known. All our mem­ory could not find a cause for this.

To be sure, the pro­cess was slow, but so is the rhythm of our lives. We did not know that un­til you came. We have seen but­ter­flies and birds, but they have no sraf. You do, strange as you seem; but you are swift and im­me­di­ate, like birds, like but­ter­flies. You re­al­ize there is a need for some­thing to help you see sraf and in­stant­ly, out of the ma­te­ri­als we have known for thou­sands of years, you put to­geth­er an in­stru­ment to do so. Be­side us, you think and act with the speed of a bird. That is how it seems, which is how we know that our rhythm seems slow to you.

But that fact is our hope. You can see things that we can­not, you can see con­nec­tions and pos­si­bil­ities and al­ter­na­tives that are in­vis­ible to us, just as sraf was in­vis­ible to you. And while we can­not see a way to sur­vive, we hope that you may. We hope that you will go swift­ly to the cause of the trees’ sick­ness and find a cure; we hope you will in­vent a means of deal­ing with the tu­alapi, who are so nu­mer­ous and so pow­er­ful.

And we hope you can do so soon, or we shall all die.

There was a mur­mur of agree­ment and ap­proval from the crowd. They were all look­ing at Mary, and she felt more than ev­er like the new pupil at a school where they had high ex­pec­ta­tions of her. She al­so felt a strange flat­tery: the idea of her­self as swift and dart­ing and bird­like was new and pleas­ant, be­cause she had al­ways thought of her­self as dogged and plod­ding. But along with that came the feel­ing that they’d got it ter­ri­bly wrong, if they saw her like that; they didn’t un­der­stand at all; she couldn’t pos­si­bly ful­fill this des­per­ate hope of theirs.

But equal­ly, she must. They were wait­ing.

Sat­ta­max, she said, mule­fa, you put your trust in me and I shall do my best. You have been kind and your life is good and beau­ti­ful and I will try very hard to help you, and now I have seen sraf, I know what it is that I am do­ing. Thank you for trust­ing me.

They nod­ded and mur­mured and stroked her with their trunks as she stepped down. She was daunt­ed by what she had agreed to do.

At that very mo­ment in the world of Cit­tagazze, the as­sas­sin­priest Fa­ther Gomez was mak­ing his way up a rough track in the moun­tains be­tween the twist­ed trunks of olive trees. The evening light slant­ed through the sil­very leaves and the air was full of the noise of crick­ets and ci­cadas.

Ahead of him he could see a lit­tle farm­house shel­tered among vines, where a goat bleat­ed and a spring trick­led down through the gray rocks. There was an old man at­tend­ing to some task be­side the house, and an old wom­an lead­ing the goat to­ward a stool and a buck­et.

In the vil­lage some way be­hind, they had told him that the wom­an he was fol­low­ing had passed this way, and that she’d talked of go­ing up in­to the moun­tains; per­haps this old cou­ple had seen her. At least there might be cheese and olives to buy, and spring­wa­ter to drink. Fa­ther Gomez was quite used to liv­ing fru­gal­ly, and there was plen­ty of time.





The Amber Spyglass





EIGHTEEN - THE SUBURBS OF THE DEAD


Lyra was awake be­fore dawn, with Pan­ta­lai­mon shiv­er­ing at her breast, and she got up to walk about and warm her­self up as the gray light seeped in­to the sky. She had nev­er known such si­lence, not even in the snow­blan­ket­ed Arc­tic; there was not a stir of wind, and the sea was so still that not the ti­ni­est rip­ple broke on the sand; the world seemed sus­pend­ed be­tween breath­ing in and breath­ing out.

Will lay curled up fast asleep, with his head on the ruck­sack to pro­tect the knife. The cloak had fall­en off his shoul­der, and she tucked it around him, pre­tend­ing that she was tak­ing care to avoid his dae­mon, and that she had the form of a cat, curled up just as he was. She must be here some­where, Lyra thought.

Car­ry­ing the still sleepy Pan­ta­lai­mon, she walked away from Will and sat down on the slope of a sand dune a lit­tle way off, so their voic­es wouldn’t wake him.

“Those lit­tle peo­ple,” Pan­ta­lai­mon said.

“I don’t like ‘em,” said Lyra de­ci­sive­ly. “I think we should get away from ‘em as soon as we can. I reck­on if we trap “em in a net or some­thing, Will can cut through and close up and that’s it, we’ll be free.”

“We haven’t got a net,” he said, “or some­thing. Any­way, I bet they’re clev­er­er than that. He’s watch­ing us now.”

Pan­ta­lai­mon was a hawk as he said that, and his eyes were keen­er than hers. The dark­ness of the sky was turn­ing minute by minute in­to the palest ethe­re­al blue, and as she looked across the sand, the first edge of the sun just cleared the rim of the sea, daz­zling her. Be­cause she was on the slope of the dune, the light reached her a few sec­onds be­fore it touched the beach, and she watched it flow around her and along to­ward Will; and then she saw the hand­high fig­ure of the Che­va­li­er Tialys, stand­ing by Will’s head, clear and wide awake and watch­ing them.

“The thing is,” said Lyra, “they can’t make us do what they want. They got to fol­low us. I bet they’re fed up.”

“If they got hold of us,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon, mean­ing him and Lyra, “and got their stings ready to stick in us, Willd have to do what they said.”

Lyra thought about it. She re­mem­bered vivid­ly the hor­ri­ble scream of pain from Mrs. Coul­ter, the eye­rolling con­vul­sions, the ghast­ly, lolling drool of the gold­en mon­key as the poi­son en­tered her blood­stream… And that was on­ly a scratch, as her moth­er had re­cent­ly been re­mind­ed else­where. Will would have to give in and do what they want­ed.

“Sup­pose they thought he wouldn’t, though,” she said, “sup­pose they thought he was so cold­heart­ed he’d just watch us die. Maybe he bet­ter make ‘em think that, if he can.”

She had brought the alethiome­ter with her, and now that it was light enough to see, she took the beloved in­stru­ment out and laid it on its black vel­vet cloth in her lap. Lit­tle by lit­tle, Lyra drift­ed in­to that trance in which the many lay­ers of mean­ing were clear to her, and where she could sense in­tri­cate webs of con­nect­ed­ness be­tween them all. As her fin­gers found the sym­bols, her mind found the words: How can we get rid of the spies?

Then the nee­dle be­gan to dart this way and that, al­most too fast to see, and some part of Lyra’s aware­ness count­ed the swings and the stops and saw at once the mean­ing of what the move­ment said.

It told her: Do not try, be­cause your lives de­pend on them.

That was a sur­prise, and not a hap­py one. But she went on and asked: How can we get to the land of the dead?

The an­swer came: Go down. Fol­low the knife. Go on­ward. Fol­low the knife.

And fi­nal­ly she asked hes­itant­ly, hal­fashamed: Is this the right thing to do?

Yes, said the alethiome­ter in­stant­ly. Yes.

She sighed, com­ing out of her trance, and tucked the hair be­hind her ears, feel­ing the first warmth of the sun on her face and shoul­ders. There were sounds in the world now, too: in­sects were stir­ring, and a very slight breeze was rustling the dry grass stems grow­ing high­er up the dune.

She put the alethiome­ter away and wan­dered back to Will, with Pan­ta­lai­mon as large as he could make him­self and li­on­shaped, in the hope of daunt­ing the Gal­livespi­ans.

The man was us­ing his lode­stone ap­pa­ra­tus, and when he’d fin­ished, Lyra said:

“You been talk­ing to Lord As­riel?”

“To his rep­re­sen­ta­tive,” said Tialys.

“We en’t go­ing.”

“That’s what I told him.”

“What did he say?”

“That was for my ears, not yours.”

“Suit your­self,” she said. “Are you mar­ried to that la­dy?”

“No. We are col­leagues.”

“Have you got any chil­dren?”

“No.”

Tialys con­tin­ued to pack the lode­stone res­ona­tor away, and as he did so, the La­dy Salmakia woke up near­by, sit­ting up grace­ful and slow from the lit­tle hol­low she’d made in the soft sand. The drag­on­flies were still asleep, teth­ered with cob­webthin cord, their wings damp with dew.

“Are there big peo­ple on your world, or are they all small like you?” Lyra said.

“We know how to deal with big peo­ple,” Tialys replied, not very help­ful­ly, and went to talk qui­et­ly to the La­dy. They spoke too soft­ly for Lyra to hear, but she en­joyed watch­ing them sip dew­drops from the mar­ram grass to re­fresh them­selves. Wa­ter must be dif­fer­ent for them, she thought to Pan­ta­lai­mon: imag­ine drops the size of your fist! They’d be hard to get in­to; they’d have a sort of elas­tic rind, like a bal­loon.

By this time Will was wak­ing, too, weari­ly. The first thing he did was to look for the Gal­livespi­ans, who looked back at once, ful­ly fo­cused on him.

He looked away and found Lyra.

“I want to tell you some­thing,” she said. “Come over here, away from…

“If you go away from us,” said Tialys’s clear voice, “you must leave the knife. If you won’t leave the knife, you must talk to each oth­er here.”

“Can’t we be pri­vate?” Lyra said in­dig­nant­ly. “We don’t want you lis­ten­ing to what we say!”

“Then go away, but leave the knife.”

There was no one else near­by, af­ter all, and cer­tain­ly the Gal­livespi­ans wouldn’t be able to use it. Will rum­maged in the ruck­sack for the wa­ter bot­tle and a cou­ple of bis­cuits, and hand­ing one to Lyra, he went with her up the slope of the dune.

“I asked the alethiome­ter,” she told him, “and it said we shouldn’t try and es­cape from the lit­tle peo­ple, be­cause they were go­ing to save our lives. So maybe we’re stuck with ‘em.”

“Have you told them what we’re go­ing to do?”

“No! And I won’t, ei­ther. ‘Cause they’ll on­ly tell Lord As­riel on that speak­in­gfid­dle and he’d go there and stop us, so we got to just go, and not talk about it in front of them.”

“They are spies, though,” Will point­ed out. “They must be good at lis­ten­ing and hid­ing. So maybe we bet­ter not men­tion it at all. We know where we’re go­ing. So we’ll just go and not talk about it, and they’ll have to put up with it and come along.”

“They can’t hear us now. They’re too far off. Will, I asked how we get there, too. It said to fol­low the knife, just that.”

“Sounds easy,” he said. “But I bet it isn’t. D’you know what Iorek told me?”

“No. He said, when I went to say good­bye, he said it would be very dif­fi­cult for you, but he thought you could do it. But he nev­er told me why…”

“The knife broke be­cause I thought of my moth­er,” he ex­plained. “So I’ve got to put her out of my mind. But… it’s like when some­one says don’t think about a crocodile, you do, you can’t help it…”

“Well, you cut through last night all right,” she said.

“Yeah, be­cause I was tired, I think. Well, we’ll see. Just fol­low the knife?”

“That’s all it said.”

“Might as well go now, then. Ex­cept there’s not much food left. We ought to find some­thing to take with us, bread and fruit or some­thing. So first I’ll find a world where we can get food, and then we’ll start look­ing prop­er­ly.”

“All right,” said Lyra, quite hap­py to be mov­ing again, with Pan and Will, alive and awake.

They made their way back to the spies, who were sit­ting alert­ly by the knife, packs on their backs.

“We should like to know what you in­tend,” said Salmakia.

“Well, we’re not com­ing to Lord As­riel any­way,” said Will. “We’ve got some­thing else to do first.”

“And will you tell us what that is, since it’s clear we can’t stop you from do­ing it?”

“No,” said Lyra, “be­cause you’d just go and tell them. You’ll have to come along with­out know­ing where we’re go­ing. Of course you could al­ways give up and go back to them.”

“Cer­tain­ly not,” said Tialys.

“We want some kind of guar­an­tee,” said Will. “You’re spies, so you’re bound to be dis­hon­est, that’s your trade. We need to know we can trust you. Last night we were all too tired and we couldn’t think about it, but there’d be noth­ing to stop you wait­ing till we were asleep and then sting­ing us to make us help­less and call­ing up Lord As­riel on that lode­stone thing. You could do that eas­ily. So we need to have a prop­er guar­an­tee that you won’t. A promise isn’t enough.”

The two Gal­livespi­ans trem­bled with anger at this slur on their hon­or.

Tialys, con­trol­ling him­self, said, “We don’t ac­cept onesid­ed de­mands. You must give some­thing in ex­change. You must tell us what your in­ten­tions are, and then I shall give the lode­stone res­ona­tor in­to your care. You must let me have it when I want to send a mes­sage, but you will al­ways know when that hap­pens, and we shall not be able to use it with­out your agree­ment. That will be our guar­an­tee. And now you tell us where you are go­ing, and why.”

Will and Lyra ex­changed a glance to con­firm it.

“All right,” Lyra said, “that’s fair. So here’s where we’re go­ing: we’re go­ing to the world of the dead. We don’t know where it is, but the knife’ll find it. That’s what we’re go­ing to do.”

The two spies were look­ing at her with open­mouthed in­creduli­ty.

Then Salmakia blinked and said, “What you say doesn’t make sense. The dead are dead, that’s all. There is no world of the dead.”

“I thought that was true, as well,” said Will. “But now I’m not sure. At least with the knife we can find out.”

“But why?”

Lyra looked at Will and saw him nod.

“Well,” she said, “be­fore I met Will, long be­fore I was asleep, I led this friend in­to dan­ger, and he was killed. I thought I was res­cu­ing him, on­ly I was mak­ing things worse. And while I was asleep I dreamed of him and I thought maybe I could make amends if I went where he’s gone and said I was sor­ry. And Will wants to find his fa­ther, who died just when he found him be­fore. See, Lord As­riel wouldn’t think of that. Nor would Mrs. Coul­ter. If we went to him we’d have to do what he wants, and he wouldn’t think of Roger at all, that’s my friend who died, it wouldn’t mat­ter to him. But it mat­ters to me. To us. So that’s what we want to do.”

“Child,” said Tialys, “when we die, ev­ery­thing is over. There is no oth­er life. You have seen death. You’ve seen dead bod­ies, and you’ve seen what hap­pens to a dae­mon when death comes. It van­ish­es. What else can there be to live on af­ter that?”

“We’re go­ing to go and find out,” said Lyra. “And now we’ve told you, I’ll take your res­ona­tor lode­stone.”

She held out her hand, and leop­ard­Pan­ta­lai­mon stood, tail swing­ing slow­ly, to re­in­force her de­mand. Tialys un­slung the pack from his back and laid it in her palm. It was sur­pris­ing­ly heavy, no bur­den for her, of course, but she mar­veled at his strength.

“And how long do you think this ex­pe­di­tion will take?” said the Che­va­li­er.

“We don’t know,” Lyra told him. “We don’t know any­thing about it, any more than you do. We’ll just go there and see.”

“First thing,” Will said, “we’ve got to get some wa­ter and some more food, some­thing easy to car­ry. So I’m go­ing to find a world where we can do that, and then we’ll set off.”

Tialys and Salmakia mount­ed their drag­on­flies and held them quiv­er­ing on the ground. The great in­sects were ea­ger for flight, but the com­mand of their rid­ers was ab­so­lute, and Lyra, watch­ing them in day­light for the first time, saw the ex­traor­di­nary fine­ness of the gray silk reins, the sil­very stir­rups, the tiny sad­dles.

Will took the knife, and a pow­er­ful temp­ta­tion made him feel for the touch of his own world: he had the cred­it card still; he could buy fa­mil­iar food; he could even tele­phone Mrs. Coop­er and ask for news of his moth­er…

The knife jarred with a sound like a nail be­ing drawn along rough stone, and his heart near­ly stopped. If he broke the blade again, it would be the end.

Af­ter a few mo­ments he tried again. In­stead of try­ing not to think of his moth­er, he said to him­self: Yes, I know she’s there, but I’m just go­ing to look away while I do this…

And that time it worked. He found a new world and slid the knife along to make an open­ing, and a few mo­ments lat­er all of them were stand­ing in what looked like a neat and pros­per­ous farm­yard in some north­ern coun­try like Hol­land or Den­mark, where the stone­flagged yard was swept and clean and a row of sta­ble doors stood open. The sun shone down through a hazy sky, and there was the smell of burn­ing in the air, as well as some­thing less pleas­ant. There was no sound of hu­man life, though a loud buzzing, so ac­tive and vig­or­ous that it sound­ed like a ma­chine, came from the sta­bles.

Lyra went and looked, and came back at once, look­ing pale.

“There’s four, she gulped, hand to her throat, and re­cov­ered, “four dead hors­es in there. And mil­li­ons of flies…”

“Look,” said Will, sw­al­low­ing, “or maybe bet­ter not.”

He was point­ing at the rasp­ber­ry canes that edged the kitchen gar­den. He’d just seen a man’s legs, one with a shoe on and one with­out, pro­trud­ing from the thick­est part of the bush­es.

Lyra didn’t want to look, but Will went to see if the man was still alive and need­ed help. He came back shak­ing his head, look­ing un­easy.

The two spies were al­ready at the farm­house door, which was ajar.

Tialys dart­ed back and said, “It smells sweet­er in there,” and then he flew back over the thresh­old while Salmakia scout­ed fur­ther around the out­build­in­gs.

Will fol­lowed the Che­va­li­er. He found him­self in a big square kitchen, an old­fash­ioned place with white chi­na on a wood­en dress­er, and a scrubbed pine ta­ble, and a hearth where a black ket­tle stood cold. Next door there was a pantry, with two shelves full of ap­ples that filled the whole room with fra­grance. The si­lence was op­pres­sive.

Lyra said qui­et­ly, “Will, is this the world of the dead?”

The same thought had oc­curred to him. But he said, “No, I don’t think so. It’s one we haven’t been in be­fore. Look, we’ll load up with as much as we can car­ry. There’s sort of rye bread, that’ll be good, it’s light, and here’s some cheese…”

When they had tak­en what they could car­ry, Will dropped a gold coin in­to the draw­er in the big pine ta­ble.

“Well?” said Lyra, see­ing Tialys raise his eye­brows. “You should al­ways pay for what you take.”

At that mo­ment Salmakia came in through the back door, land­ing her drag­on­fly on the ta­ble in a shim­mer of elec­tric blue.

“There are men com­ing,” she said, “on foot, with weapons. They’re on­ly a few min­utes’ walk away. And there is a vil­lage burn­ing be­yond the fields.”

And as she spoke, they could hear the sound of boots on grav­el, and a voice is­su­ing or­ders, and the jin­gle of met­al.

“Then we should go,” said Will.

He felt in the air with the knife­point. And at once he was aware of a new kind of sen­sa­tion. The blade seemed to be slid­ing along a very smooth sur­face, like a mir­ror, and then it sank through slow­ly un­til he was able to cut. But it was re­sis­tant, like heavy cloth, and when he made an open­ing, he blinked with sur­prise and alarm: be­cause the world he was open­ing in­to was the same in ev­ery de­tail as the one they were al­ready stand­ing in.

“What’s hap­pen­ing?” said Lyra.

The spies were look­ing through, puz­zled. But it was more than puz­zle­ment they felt. Just as the air had re­sist­ed the knife, so some­thing in this open­ing re­sist­ed their go­ing through. Will had to push against some­thing in­vis­ible and then pull Lyra af­ter him, and the Gal­livespi­ans could hard­ly make any head­way at all. They had to perch the drag­on­flies on the chil­dren’s hands, and even then it was like pulling them against a pres­sure in the air; their filmy wings bent and twist­ed, and the lit­tle rid­ers had to stroke their mounts’ heads and whis­per to calm their fears.

But af­ter a few sec­onds of strug­gle, they were all through, and Will found the edge of the win­dow (though it was im­pos­si­ble to see) and closed it, shut­ting the sound of the sol­diers away in their own world.

“Will,” said Lyra, and he turned to see that there was an­oth­er fig­ure in the kitchen with them.

His heart jolt­ed. It was the man he’d seen not ten min­utes be­fore, stark dead in the bush­es with his throat cut.

He was mid­dleaged, lean, with the look of a man who spent most of the time in the open air. But now he was look­ing al­most crazed, or par­alyzed, with shock. His eyes were so wide that the white showed all around the iris, and he was clutch­ing the edge of the ta­ble with a trem­bling hand. His throat, Will was glad to see, was in­tact.

He opened his mouth to speak, but no words came out. All he could do was point at Will and Lyra.

Lyra said, “Ex­cuse us for be­ing in your house, but we had to es­cape from the men who were com­ing. I’m sor­ry if we star­tled you. I’m Lyra, and this is Will, and these are our friends, the Che­va­li­er Tialys and the La­dy Salmakia. Could you tell us your name and where we are?”

This nor­mal­sound­ing re­quest seemed to bring the man to his sens­es, and a shud­der passed over him, as if he were wak­ing from a dream.

“I’m dead,” he said. “I’m ly­ing out there, dead. I know I am. You ain’t dead. What’s hap­pen­ing? God help me, they cut my throat. What’s hap­pen­ing?”

Lyra stepped clos­er to Will when the man said I’m dead, and Pan­ta­lai­mon fled to her breast as a mouse. As for the Gal­livespi­ans, they were try­ing to con­trol their drag­on­flies, be­cause the great in­sects seemed to have an aver­sion for the man and dart­ed here and there in the kitchen, look­ing for a way out.

But the man didn’t no­tice them. He was still try­ing to un­der­stand what had hap­pened.

“Are you a ghost?” Will said cau­tious­ly.

The man reached out his hand, and Will tried to take it, but his fin­gers closed on the air. A tin­gle of cold was all he felt.

When he saw it hap­pen, the man looked at his own hand, ap­palled. The numb­ness was be­gin­ning to wear off, and he could feel the pity of his state.

“Tru­ly,” he said, “I am dead… I’m dead, and I’m go­ing to Hell…”

“Hush,” said Lyra, “we’ll go to­geth­er. What’s your name?”

“Dirk Jansen I was,” he said, “but al­ready I… I don’t know what to do… Don’t know where to go…”

Will opened the door. The barn­yard looked the same, the kitchen gar­den was un­changed, the same hazy sun shone down. And there was the man’s body, un­touched.

A lit­tle groan broke from Dirk Jansen’s throat, as if there were no de­ny­ing it any­more. The drag­on­flies dart­ed out of the door and skimmed over the ground and then shot up high, faster than birds. The man was look­ing around help­less­ly, rais­ing his hands, low­er­ing them again, ut­ter­ing lit­tle cries.

“I can’t stay here… Can’t stay,” he was say­ing. “But this ain’t the farm I knew. This is wrong. I got to go…”

“Where are you go­ing, Mr. Jansen?” said Lyra.

“Down the road. Dun­no. Got to go. Can’t stay here…”

Salmakia flew down to perch on Lyra’s hand. The drag­on­fly’s lit­tle claws pricked as the La­dy said, “There are peo­ple walk­ing from the vil­lage, peo­ple like this man, all walk­ing in the same di­rec­tion.”

“Then we’ll go with them,” said Will, and swung his ruck­sack over his shoul­der.

Dirk Jansen was al­ready pass­ing his own body, avert­ing his t eyes. He looked al­most as if he were drunk, stop­ping, mov­ing on, wan­der­ing to left and right, stum­bling over lit­tle ruts and stones on the path his liv­ing feet had known so well.

Lyra came af­ter Will, and Pan­ta­lai­mon be­came a kestrel and flew up as high as he could, mak­ing Lyra gasp.

“They’re right,” he said when he came down. “There’s lines of peo­ple all com­ing from the vil­lage. Dead peo­ple…”

And soon they saw them, too: twen­ty or so men, wom­en, and chil­dren, all mov­ing as Dirk Jansen had done, un­cer­tain and shocked. The vil­lage was half a mile away, and the peo­ple were com­ing to­ward them, close to­geth­er in the mid­dle of the road. When Dirk Jansen saw the oth­er ghosts, he broke in­to a stum­bling run, and they held out their hands to greet him.

“Even if they don’t know where they’re go­ing, they’re all go­ing there to­geth­er,” Lyra said. “We bet­ter just go with them.”

“D’you think they had dae­mons in this world?” said Will.

“Can’t tell. If you saw one of em in your world, would you know he was a ghost?”

“It’s hard to say. They don’t look nor­mal, ex­act­ly…There was a man I used to see in my town, and he used to walk about out­side the shops al­ways hold­ing the same old plas­tic bag, and he nev­er spoke to any­one or went in­side. And no one ev­er looked at him. I used to pre­tend he was a ghost. They look a bit like him. Maybe my world’s full of ghosts and I nev­er knew.”

“I don’t think mine is,” said Lyra doubt­ful­ly.

“Any­way, this must be the world of the dead. These peo­ple have just been killed, those sol­diers must’ve done it, and here they are, and it’s just like the world they were alive in. I thought it’d be a lot dif­fer­ent…”

“Will, it’s fad­ing,” she said. “Look!”

She was clutch­ing his arm. He stopped and looked around, and she was right. Not long be­fore he had found the win­dow in Ox­ford and stepped through in­to the oth­er world of Cit­tagazze, there had been an eclipse of the sun, and like mil­li­ons of oth­ers Will had stood out­side at mid­day and watched as the bright day­light fad­ed and dimmed un­til a sort of eerie twi­light cov­ered the hous­es, the trees, the park. Ev­ery­thing was just as clear as in full day­light, but there was less light to see it by, as if all the strength were drain­ing out of a dy­ing sun.

What was hap­pen­ing now was like that, but odd­er, be­cause the edges of things were los­ing their def­ini­tion as well and be­com­ing blurred.

“It’s not like go­ing blind, even,” said Lyra, fright­ened, “be­cause it’s not that we can’t see things, it’s like the things them­selves are fad­ing…”

The col­or was slow­ly seep­ing out of the world. A dim green gray for the bright green of the trees and the grass, a dim sand gray for the vivid yel­low of a field of corn, a dim blood gray for the red bricks of a neat farm­house …

The peo­ple them­selves, clos­er now, had be­gun to no­tice, too, and were point­ing and hold­ing one an­oth­er’s arms for re­as­sur­an­ce.

The on­ly bright things in the whole land­scape were the bril­liant redandyel­low and elec­tric blue of the drag­on­flies, and their lit­tle rid­ers, and Will and Lyra, and Pan­ta­lai­mon, who was hov­er­ing kestrelshaped close above.

They were close to the first of the peo­ple now, and it was clear: they were all ghosts. Will and Lyra took a step to­ward each oth­er, but there was noth­ing to fear, for the ghosts were far more afraid of them and were hang­ing back, un­will­ing to ap­proach.

Will called out, “Don’t be afraid. We’re not go­ing to hurt you. Where are you go­ing?” “

They looked at the old­est man among them, as if he were their guide.

“We’re go­ing where all the oth­ers go,” he said. “Seems as if I know, but I can’t re­mem­ber learn­ing it. Seems as if it’s along the road. We’ll know it when we get there.”

“Ma­ma,” said a child, “why’s it get­ting dark in the day­time?”

“Hush, dear, don’t fret,” the moth­er said. “Can’t make any­thing bet­ter by fret­ting. We’re dead, I ex­pect.”

“But where are we go­ing?” the child said. “I don’t want to be dead, Ma­ma!”

“We’re go­ing to see Grand­pa,” the moth­er said des­per­ate­ly.

But the child wouldn’t be con­soled and wept bit­ter­ly. Oth­ers in the group looked at the moth­er with sym­pa­thy or an­noy­an­ce, but there was noth­ing they could do to help, and they all walked on dis­con­so­late­ly through the fad­ing land­scape as the child’s thin cries went on, and on, and on.

The Che­va­li­er Tialys had spo­ken to Salmakia be­fore skim­ming ahead, and Will and Lyra watched the drag­on­fly with eyes greedy for its bright­ness and vig­or as it got small­er and small­er. The La­dy flew down and perched her in­sect on Will’s hand.

“The Che­va­li­er has gone to see what’s ahead,” she said. “We think the land­scape is fad­ing be­cause these peo­ple are for­get­ting it. The far­ther they go away from their homes, the dark­er it will get.”

“But why d’you think they’re mov­ing?” Lyra said. “If I was a ghost I’d want to stay in the places I knew, not wan­der along and get lost.”

“They feel un­hap­py there,” Will said, guess­ing. “It’s where they’ve just died. They’re afraid of it.”

“No, they’re pulled on­ward by some­thing,” said the La­dy. “Some in­stinct is draw­ing them down the road.”

And in­deed the ghosts were mov­ing more pur­pose­ful­ly now that they were out of sight of their own vil­lage. The sky was as dark as if a mighty storm were threat­en­ing, but there was none of the elec­tric ten­sion that comes ahead of a storm. The ghosts walked on stea­di­ly, and the road ran straight ahead across a land­scape that was al­most fea­ture­less.

From time to time one of them would glance at Will or Lyra, or at the bril­liant drag­on­fly and its rid­er, as if they were cu­ri­ous. Fi­nal­ly the old­est man said:

“You, you boy and girl. You ain’t dead. You ain’t ghosts. What you com­ing along here for?”

“We came through by ac­ci­dent,” Lyra told him be­fore Will could speak. “I don’t know how it hap­pened. We were try­ing to es­cape from those men, and we just seemed to find our­selves here.”

“How will you know when you’ve got to the place where you’ve got to go?” said Will.

“I ex­pect we’ll be told,” said the ghost con­fi­dent­ly. “They’ll sep­arate out the sin­ners and the righ­teous, I dare say. It’s no good pray­ing now. It’s too late for that. You should have done that when you were alive. No use now.”

It was quite clear which group he ex­pect­ed to be in, and quite clear, too, that he thought it wouldn’t be a big one. The oth­er ghosts heard him un­easi­ly, but he was all the guid­an­ce they had, so they fol­lowed with­out ar­gu­ing.

And on they walked, trudg­ing in si­lence un­der a sky that had fi­nal­ly dark­ened to a dull iron gray and re­mained there with­out get­ting any dark­er. The liv­ing ones found them­selves look­ing to their left and right, above and be­low, for any­thing that was bright or live­ly or joy­ful, and they were al­ways dis­ap­point­ed un­til a lit­tle spark ap­peared ahead and raced to­ward them through the air. It was the Che­va­li­er, and Salmakia urged her drag­on­fly ahead to meet him, with a cry of plea­sure.

They con­ferred and sped back to the chil­dren.

“There’s a town ahead,” said Tialys. “It looks like a refugee camp, but it’s ob­vi­ous­ly been there for cen­turies or more. And I think there’s a sea or a lake be­yond it, but that’s cov­ered in mist. I could hear the cries of birds. And there are hun­dreds of peo­ple ar­riv­ing ev­ery minute, from ev­ery di­rec­tion, peo­ple like these, ghosts…”

The ghosts them­selves lis­tened as he spoke, though with­out much cu­rios­ity. They seemed to have set­tled in­to a dull trance, and Lyra want­ed to shake them, to urge them to strug­gle and wake up and look around for a way out.

“How are we go­ing to help these peo­ple, Will?” she said.

He couldn’t even guess. As they moved on, they could see a move­ment on the hori­zon to the left and right, and ahead of them a dirty­col­ored smoke was ris­ing slow­ly to add its dark­ness to the dis­mal air. The move­ment was peo­ple, or ghosts: in lines or pairs or groups or alone, but all emp­ty­hand­ed, hun­dreds and thou­sands of men and wom­en and chil­dren were drift­ing over the plain to­ward the source of the smoke.

The ground was slop­ing down­ward now, and be­com­ing more and more like a rub­bish dump. The air was heavy and full of smoke, and of oth­er smells be­sides: acrid chem­icals, de­cay­ing veg­etable mat­ter, sewage. And the far­ther down they went, the worse it got. There was not a patch of clean soil in sight, and the on­ly plants grow­ing any­where were rank weeds and coarse gray­ish grass.

Ahead of them, above the wa­ter, was the mist. It rose like a cliff to merge with the gloomy sky, and from some­where in­side it came those bird cries that Tialys had re­ferred to.

Be­tween the waste heaps and the mist, there lay the first town of the dead.





The Amber Spyglass





NINETEEN - LYRA AND HER DEATH


Here and there, fires had been lit among the ru­ins. The town was a jum­ble, with no streets, no squares, and no open spaces ex­cept where a build­ing had fall­en. A few church­es or pub­lic build­in­gs still stood above the rest, though their roofs were holed or their walls cracked, and in one case a whole por­ti­co had crum­pled on­to its columns. Be­tween the shells of the stone build­in­gs, a mazy clut­ter of shacks and shanties had been put to­geth­er out of lengths of roof­ing tim­ber, beat­enout petrol cans or bis­cuit tins, torn plas­tic sheet­ing, scraps of ply­wood or hard­board.

The ghosts who had come with them were hur­ry­ing to­ward the town, and from ev­ery di­rec­tion came more of them, so many that they looked like the grains of sand that trick­le to­ward the hole of an hour­glass. The ghosts walked straight in­to the squalid con­fu­sion of the town, as if they knew ex­act­ly where they were go­ing, and Lyra and Will were about to fol­low them; but then they were stopped.

A fig­ure stepped out of a patchedup door­way and said, “Wait, wait.”

A dim light was glow­ing be­hind him, and it wasn’t easy to make out his fea­tures; but they knew he wasn’t a ghost. He was like them, alive. He was a thin man who could have been any age, dressed in a drab and tat­tered busi­ness suit, and he was hold­ing a pen­cil and a sheaf of pa­pers held to­geth­er with a clip. The build­ing he’d stepped out of had the look of a cus­toms post on a rarely vis­it­ed fron­tier.

“What is this place?” said Will, “And why can’t we go in?”

“You’re not dead,” said the man weari­ly. “You have to wait in the hold­ing area. Go far­ther along the road to the left and give these pa­pers to the of­fi­cial at the gate.”

“But ex­cuse me, sir,” said Lyra, “I hope you don’t mind me ask­ing, but how can we have come this far if we en’t dead? Be­cause this is the world of the dead, isn’t it?”

“It’s a sub­urb of the world of the dead. Some­times the liv­ing come here by mis­take, but they have to wait in the hold­ing area be­fore they can go on.”

“Wait for how long?”

“Un­til they die.”

Will felt his head swim. He could see Lyra was about to ar­gue, and be­fore she could speak, he said, “Can you just ex­plain what hap­pens then? I mean, these ghosts who come here, do they stay in this town for­ev­er?”

“No, no,” said the of­fi­cial. “This is just a port of tran­sit. They go on be­yond here by boat.”

“Where to?” said Will.

“That’s not some­thing I can tell you,” said the man, and a bit­ter smile pulled his mouth down at the cor­ners. “You must move along, please. You must go to the hold­ing area.”

Will took the pa­pers the man was hold­ing out, and then held Lyra’s arm and urged her away.

The drag­on­flies were fly­ing slug­gish­ly now, and Tialys ex­plained that they need­ed to rest; so they perched on Will’s ruck­sack, and Lyra let the spies sit on her shoul­ders. Pan­ta­lai­mon, leop­ard­shaped, looked up at them jeal­ous­ly, but he said noth­ing. They moved along the track, skirt­ing the wretched shanties and the pools of sewage, and watch­ing the nev­erend­ing stream of ghosts ar­riv­ing and pass­ing with­out hin­drance in­to the town it­self.

“We’ve got to get over the wa­ter, like the rest of them,” said Will. “And maybe the peo­ple in this hold­ing place will tell us how. They don’t seem to be an­gry any­way, or dan­ger­ous. It’s strange. And these pa­pers… “

They were sim­ply scraps of pa­per torn from a note­book, with ran­dom words scrib­bled in pen­cil and crossed out. It was as if these peo­ple were play­ing a game, and wait­ing to see when the trav­el­ers would chal­lenge them or give in and laugh. And yet it all looked so re­al.

It was get­ting dark­er and cold­er, and time was hard to keep track of. Lyra thought they walked for half an hour, or maybe it was twice as long; the look of the place didn’t change. Fi­nal­ly they reached a lit­tle wood­en shack like the one they’d stopped at ear­li­er, where a dim bulb glowed on a bare wire over the door.

As they ap­proached, a man dressed much like the oth­er one came out hold­ing a piece of bread and but­ter in one hand, and with­out a word looked at their pa­pers and nod­ded.

He hand­ed them back and was about to go in­side when Will said, “Ex­cuse me, where do we go now?”

“Go and find some­where to stay,” said the man, not un­kind­ly. “Just ask. Ev­ery­body’s wait­ing, same as you.”

He turned away and shut his door against the cold, and the trav­el­ers turned down in­to the heart of the shan­ty town where the liv­ing peo­ple had to stay.

It was very much like the main town: shab­by lit­tle huts, re­paired a dozen times, patched with scraps of plas­tic or cor­ru­gat­ed iron, lean­ing crazi­ly against each oth­er over mud­dy al­ley­ways. At some places, an an­bar­ic ca­ble looped down from a brack­et and pro­vid­ed enough fee­ble cur­rent to pow­er a naked light­bulb or two, strung out over the near­by huts. Most of what light there was, how­ev­er, came from the fires. Their smoky glow flick­ered red­ly over the scraps and tat­ters of build­ing ma­te­ri­al, as if they were the last re­main­ing flames of a great con­fla­gra­tion, stay­ing alive out of pure mal­ice.

But as Will and Lyra and the Gal­livespi­ans came clos­er and saw more de­tail, they picked out many more fig­ures sit­ting in the dark­ness by them­selves, or lean­ing against the walls, or gath­ered in small groups, talk­ing qui­et­ly.

“Why aren’t those peo­ple in­side?” said Lyra. “It’s cold.”

“They’re not peo­ple,” said the La­dy Salmakia. “They’re not even ghosts. They’re some­thing else, but I don’t know what.”

The trav­el­ers came to the first group of shacks, which were lit by one of those big weak an­bar­ic bulbs on a ca­ble swing­ing slight­ly in the cold wind, and Will put his hand on the knife at his belt. There was a group of those peo­ple­shaped things out­side, crouch­ing on their heels and rolling dice, and when the chil­dren came near, they stood up: five of them, all men, their faces in shad­ow and their clothes shab­by, all silent.

“What is the name of this town?” said Will.

There was no re­ply. Some of them took a step back­ward, and all five moved a lit­tle clos­er to­geth­er, as if they were afraid. Lyra felt her skin crawl­ing, and all the tiny hairs on her arms stand­ing on end, though she couldn’t have said why. In­side her shirt Pan­ta­lai­mon was shiv­er­ing and whis­per­ing, “No, no, Lyra, no, go away, let’s go back, please …”

The “peo­ple” made no move, and fi­nal­ly Will shrugged and said, “Well, good evening to you any­way,” and moved on. They met a sim­ilar re­sponse from all the oth­er fig­ures they spoke to, and all the time their ap­pre­hen­sion grew.

“Will, are they Specters?” Lyra said qui­et­ly. “Are we grown up enough to see Specters now?”

“I don’t think so. If we were, they’d at­tack us, but they seem to be afraid them­selves. I don’t know what they are.”

A door opened, and light spilled out on the mud­dy ground. A man, a re­al man, a hu­man be­ing, stood in the door­way, watch­ing them ap­proach. The lit­tle clus­ter of fig­ures around the door moved back a step or two, as if out of re­spect, and they saw the man’s face: stol­id, harm­less, and mild.

“Who are you?” he said.

“Trav­el­ers,” said Will. “We don’t know where we are. What is this town?”

“This is the hold­ing area,” said the man. “Have you trav­eled far?”

“A long way, yes, and we’re tired,” said Will. “Could we buy some food and pay for shel­ter?”

The man was look­ing past them, in­to the dark, and then he came out and looked around fur­ther, as if there were some­one miss­ing. Then he turned to the strange fig­ures stand­ing by and said:

“Did you see any death?”

They shook their heads, and the chil­dren heard a mur­mur of “No, no, none.”

The man turned back. Be­hind him, in the door­way, there were faces look­ing out: a wom­an, two young chil­dren, an­oth­er man. They were all ner­vous and ap­pre­hen­sive.

“Death?” said Will. “We’re not bring­ing any death.”

But that fact seemed to be the very thing they were wor­ried about, be­cause when Will spoke, there was a soft gasp from the liv­ing peo­ple, and even the fig­ures out­side shrank away a lit­tle.

“Ex­cuse me,” said Lyra, step­ping for­ward in her best po­lite way, as if the house­keep­er of Jor­dan Col­lege were glar­ing at her. “I couldn’t help not­ic­ing, but these gen­tle­men here, are they dead? I’m sor­ry for ask­ing, if it’s rude, but where we come from it’s very un­usu­al, and we nev­er saw any­one like them be­fore. If I’m be­ing im­po­lite I do beg your par­don. But you see, in my world, we have dae­mons, ev­ery­one has a dae­mon, and we’d be shocked if we saw some­one with­out one, just like you’re shocked to see us. And now we’ve been trav­el­ing, Will and me, this is Will, and I’m Lyra, I’ve learned there are some peo­ple who don’t seem to have dae­mons, like Will doesn’t, and I was scared till I found out they were just or­di­nary like me re­al­ly. So maybe that’s why some­one from your world might be just a bit sort of ner­vous when they see us, if you think we’re dif­fer­ent.”

The man said, “Lyra? And Will?”

“Yes, sir,” she said humbly.

“Are those your dae­mons?” he said, point­ing to the spies on her shoul­der.

“No,” said Lyra, and she was tempt­ed to say, “They’re our ser­vants,” but she felt Will would have thought that a bad idea; so she said, “They’re our friends, the Che­va­li­er Tialys and the La­dy Salmakia, very dis­tin­guished and wise peo­ple who are trav­el­ing with us. Oh, and this is my dae­mon,” she said, tak­ing mouseP­an­ta­lai­mon out of her pock­et. “You see, we’re harm­less, we promise we won’t hurt you. And we do need food and shel­ter. We’ll move on to­mor­row. Hon­est.”

Ev­ery­one wait­ed. The man’s ner­vous­ness was soothed a lit­tle by her hum­ble tone, and the spies had the good sense to look mod­est and harm­less. Af­ter a pause the man said:

“Well, though it’s strange, I sup­pose these are strange times.. .Come in, then, be wel­come …”

The fig­ures out­side nod­ded, one or two of them gave lit­tle bows, and they stood aside re­spect­ful­ly as Will and Lyra walked in­to the warmth and light. The man closed the door be­hind them and hooked a wire over a nail to keep it shut.

It was a sin­gle room, lit by a naph­tha lamp on the ta­ble, and clean but shab­by. The ply­wood walls were dec­orat­ed with pic­tures cut from film­star mag­azines, and with a pat­tern made with fin­ger­prints of soot. There was an iron stove against one wall, with a clotheshorse in front of it, where some dingy shirts were steam­ing, and on a dress­ing ta­ble there was a shrine of plas­tic flow­ers, seashells, col­ored scent bot­tles, and oth­er gaudy bits and pieces, all sur­round­ing the pic­ture of a jaun­ty skele­ton with a top hat and dark glass­es.

The shan­ty was crowd­ed: as well as the man and the wom­an and the two young chil­dren, there was a ba­by in a crib, an old­er man, and in one cor­ner, in a heap of blan­kets, a very old wom­an, who was ly­ing and watch­ing ev­ery­thing with glit­ter­ing eyes, her face as wrin­kled as the blan­kets. As Lyra looked at her, she had a shock: the blan­kets stirred, and a very thin arm emerged, in a black sleeve, and then an­oth­er face, a man’s, so an­cient it was al­most a skele­ton. In fact, he looked more like the skele­ton in the pic­ture than like a liv­ing hu­man be­ing; and then Will, too, no­ticed, and all the trav­el­ers to­geth­er re­al­ized that he was one of those shad­owy, po­lite fig­ures like the ones out­side. And all of them felt as non­plussed as the man had been when he’d first seen them.

In fact, all the peo­ple in the crowd­ed lit­tle shack, all ex­cept the ba­by, who was asleep, were at a loss for words. It was Lyra who found her voice first.

“That’s very kind of you,” she said, “thank you, good evening, we’re very pleased to be here. And like I said, we’re sor­ry to have ar­rived with­out any death, if that’s the nor­mal way of things. But we won’t dis­turb you any more than we have to. You see, we’re look­ing for the land of the dead, and that’s how we hap­pened to come here. But we don’t know where it is, or whether this is part of it, or how to get there, or what. So if you can tell us any­thing about it, we’ll be very grate­ful.”

The peo­ple in the shack were still star­ing, but Lyra’s words eased the at­mo­sphere a lit­tle, and the wom­an in­vit­ed them to sit at the ta­ble, draw­ing out a bench. Will and Lyra lift­ed the sleep­ing drag­on­flies up to a shelf in a dark cor­ner, where Tialys said they would rest till day­light, and then the Gal­livespi­ans joined them on the ta­ble.

The wom­an had been prepar­ing a dish of stew, and she peeled a cou­ple of pota­toes and cut them in­to it to make it go far­ther, urg­ing her hus­band to of­fer the trav­el­ers some oth­er re­fresh­ment while it cooked. He brought out a bot­tle of clear and pun­gent spir­it that smelled to Lyra like the gyp­tians’ jen­niv­er, and the two spies ac­cept­ed a glass in­to which they dipped lit­tle ves­sels of their own.

Lyra would have ex­pect­ed the fam­ily to stare most at the Gal­livespi­ans, but their cu­rios­ity was di­rect­ed just as much, she thought, at her and Will. She didn’t wait long to ask why.

“You’re the first peo­ple we ev­er saw with­out a death,” said the man, whose name, they’d learned, was Pe­ter. “Since we come here, that is. We’re like you, we come here be­fore we was dead, by some chance or ac­ci­dent. We got to wait till our death tells us it’s time.”

“Your death tells you?” said Lyra.

“Yes. What we found out when we come here, oh, long ago for most of us, we found we all brought our deaths with us. This is where we found out. We had ‘em all the time, and we nev­er knew. See, ev­ery­one has a death. It goes ev­ery­where with ‘em, all their life long, right close by. Our deaths, they’re out­side, tak­ing the air; they’ll come in by and by. Granny’s death, he’s there with her, he’s close to her, very close.”

“Doesn’t it scare you, hav­ing your death close by all the time?” said Lyra.

“Why ev­er would it? If he’s there, you can keep an eye on him. I’d be a lot more ner­vous not know­ing where he was.”

“And ev­ery­one has their own death?” said Will, mar­vel­ing.

“Why, yes, the mo­ment you’re born, your death comes in­to the world with you, and it’s your death that takes you out.”

“Ah,” said Lyra, “that’s what we need to know, be­cause we’re try­ing to find the land of the dead, and we don’t know how to get there. Where do we go then, when we die?”

“Your death taps you on the shoul­der, or takes your hand, and says, ‘Come along o’ me, it’s time.’ It might hap­pen when you’re sick with a fever, or when you choke on a piece of dry bread, or when you fall off a high build­ing; in the mid­dle of your pain and tra­vail, your death comes to you kind­ly and says, ‘Easy now, easy, child, you come along o’ me,’ and you go with them in a boat out across the lake in­to the mist. What hap­pens there, no one knows. No one’s ev­er come back.”

The wom­an told a child to call the deaths in, and he scam­pered to the door and spoke to them. Will and Lyra watched in won­der, and the Gal­livespi­ans drew clos­er to­geth­er, as the deaths, one for each of the fam­ily, came in through the door: pale, un­re­mark­able fig­ures in shab­by clothes, just drab and qui­et and dull.

“These are your deaths?” said Tialys.

“In­deed, sir,” said Pe­ter.

“Do you know when they’ll tell you it’s time to go?”

“No. But you know they’re close by, and that’s a com­fort.”

Tialys said noth­ing, but it was clear that he felt it would be any­thing but a com­fort. The deaths stood po­lite­ly along the wall, and it was strange to see how lit­tle space they took up, and to find how lit­tle no­tice they at­tract­ed. Lyra and Will soon found them­selves ig­nor­ing them al­to­geth­er, though Will thought: Those men I killed, their deaths were close be­side them all the time, they didn’t know, and I didn’t know…

The wom­an, Martha, dished the stew on­to chipped enam­el plates and put some in a bowl for the deaths to pass among them­selves. They didn’t eat, but the good smell kept them con­tent. Present­ly all the fam­ily and their guests were eat­ing hun­gri­ly, and Pe­ter asked the chil­dren where they’d come from, and what their world was like.

“I’ll tell you all about it,” said Lyra.

As she said that, as she took charge, part of her felt a lit­tle stream of plea­sure ris­ing up­ward in her breast like the bub­bles in cham­pagne. And she knew Will was watch­ing, and she was hap­py that he could see her do­ing what she was best at, do­ing it for him and for all of them.

She start­ed by telling about her par­ents. They were a duke and duchess, very im­por­tant and wealthy, who had been cheat­ed out of their es­tate by a po­lit­ical en­emy and thrown in­to prison. But they man­aged to es­cape by climb­ing down a rope with the ba­by Lyra in her fa­ther’s arms, and they re­gained the fam­ily for­tune, on­ly to be at­tacked and mur­dered by out­laws. Lyra would have been killed as well, and roast­ed and eat­en, had not Will res­cued her just in time and tak­en her back to the wolves, in the for­est where he was be­ing brought ,; up as one of them. He had fall­en over­board as a ba­by from the side of his fa­ther’s ship and been washed up on a des­olate shore, where a fe­male wolf had suck­led him and kept him alive.

The peo­ple ate up this non­sense with placid creduli­ty, and even the deaths crowd­ed close to lis­ten, perch­ing on the bench or ly­ing on the floor close by, gaz­ing at her with their mild and cour­te­ous faces as she spun out the tale of her life with Will in the for­est.

He and Lyra stayed with the wolves for a while, and then moved to Ox­ford to work in the kitchens of Jor­dan Col­lege. There they met Roger, and when Jor­dan was at­tacked by the brick­burn­ers who lived in the clay beds, they had to es­cape in a hur­ry; so she and Will and Roger cap­tured a gyp­tian nar­row boat and sailed it all the way down the Thames, near­ly get­ting caught at Abing­don Lock, and then they’d been sunk by the Wap­ping pi­rates and had to swim for safe­ty to a three­mast­ed clip­per just set­ting off for Hang Chow in Cathay to trade for tea.

And on the clip­per they’d met the Gal­livespi­ans, who were strangers from the moon, blown down to the earth by a fierce gale out of the Milky Way. They’d tak­en refuge in the crow’s nest, and she and Will and Roger used to take turns go­ing up there to see them, on­ly one day Roger lost his foot­ing and plunged down in­to Davy Jones’s lock­er.

They tried to per­suade the cap­tain to turn the ship around and look for him, but he was a hard, fierce man on­ly in­ter­est­ed in the prof­it he’d make by get­ting to Cathay quick­ly, and he clapped them in irons. But the Gal­livespi­ans brought them a file, and…

And so on. From time to time she’d turn to Will or the spies for con­fir­ma­tion, and Salmakia would add a de­tail or two, or Will would nod, and the sto­ry wound it­self up to the point where the chil­dren and their friends from the moon had to find their way to the land of the dead in or­der to learn, from her par­ents, the se­cret of where the fam­ily for­tune had been buried.

“And if we knew our deaths, in our land,” she said, “like you do here, it would be eas­ier, prob­ably; but I think we’re re­al­ly lucky to find our way here, so’s we could get your ad­vice. And thank you very much for be­ing so kind and lis­ten­ing, and for giv­ing us this meal, it was re­al­ly nice.

“But what we need now, you see, or in the morn­ing maybe, is we need to find a way out across the wa­ter where the dead peo­ple go, and see if we can get there, too. Is there any boats we could sort of hire?”

They looked doubt­ful. The chil­dren, flushed with tired­ness, looked with sleepy eyes from one grownup to the oth­er, but no one could sug­gest where they could find a boat.

Then came a voice that hadn’t spo­ken be­fore. From the depths of the bed­clothes in the cor­ner came a drycracked­nasal tone, not a wom­an’s voice, not a liv­ing voice: it was the voice of the grand­moth­er’s death.

“The on­ly way you’ll cross the lake and go to the land of the dead,” he said, and he was lean­ing up on his el­bow, point­ing with a skin­ny fin­ger at Lyra, “is with your own deaths. You must call up your own deaths. I have heard of peo­ple like you, who keep their deaths at bay. You don’t like them, and out of cour­tesy they stay out of sight. But they’re not far off. When­ev­er you turn your head, your deaths dodge be­hind you. Wher­ev­er you look, they hide. They can hide in a teacup. Or in a dew­drop. Or in a breath of wind. Not like me and old Mag­da here,” he said, and he pinched her with­ered cheek, and she pushed his hand away. “We live to­geth­er in kind­ness and friend­ship. That’s the an­swer, that’s it, that’s what you’ve got to do, say wel­come, make friends, be kind, in­vite your deaths to come close to you, and see what you can get them to agree to.”

His words fell in­to Lyra’s mind like heavy stones, and Will, too, felt the dead­ly weight of them.

“How should we do that?” he said.

“You’ve on­ly got to wish for it, and the thing is done.”

“Wait,” said Tialys.

Ev­ery eye turned to him, and those deaths ly­ing on the floor sat up to turn their blank, mild faces to his tiny, pas­sion­ate one. He was stand­ing close by Salmakia, his hand on her shoul­der. Lyra could see what he was think­ing: he was go­ing to say that this had gone too far, they must turn back, they were tak­ing this fool­ish­ness to ir­re­spon­si­ble lengths.

So she stepped in. “Ex­cuse me,” she said to the man Pe­ter, “but me and our friend the Che­va­li­er, we’ve got to go out­side for a minute, be­cause he needs to talk to his friends in the moon through my spe­cial in­stru­ment. We won’t be long.”

And she picked him up care­ful­ly, avoid­ing his spurs, and took him out­side in­to the dark, where a loose piece of cor­ru­gat­ed iron roof­ing was bang­ing in the cold wind with a melan­choly sound.

“You must stop,” he said as she set him on an up­turned oil drum, in the fee­ble light of one of those an­bar­ic bulbs that swung on its ca­ble over­head. “This is far enough. No more.”

“But we made an agree­ment,” Lyra said.

“No, no. Not to these lengths.”

“All right. Leave us. You fly on back. Will can cut a win­dow in­to your world, or any world you like, and you can fly through and be safe, that’s all right, we don’t mind.”

“Do you re­al­ize what you’re do­ing?”

“Yes.”

“You don’t. You’re a thought­less, ir­re­spon­si­ble, ly­ing child. Fan­ta­sy comes so eas­ily to you that your whole na­ture is rid­dled with dis­hon­es­ty, and you don’t even ad­mit the truth when it stares you in the face. Well, if you can’t see it, I’ll tell you plain­ly: you can­not, you must not risk your death. You must come back with us now. I’ll call Lord As­riel and we can be safe in the fortress in hours.”

Lyra felt a great sob of rage build­ing up in her chest, and stamped her foot, un­able to keep still.

“You don’t know,” she cried, “you just don’t know what I got in my head or my heart, do you? I don’t know if you peo­ple ev­er have chil­dren, maybe you lay eggs or some­thing, I wouldn’t be sur­prised, be­cause you’re not kind, you’re not gen­er­ous, you’re not con­sid­er­ate, you’re not cru­el, even, that would be bet­ter, if you were cru­el, be­cause it’d mean you took us se­ri­ous, you didn’t just go along with us when it suit­ed you… Oh, I can’t trust you at all now! You said you’d help and we’d do it to­geth­er, and now you want to stop us, you’re the dis­hon­est one, Tialys!”

“I wouldn’t let a child of my own speak to me in the in­so­lent, high­hand­ed way you’re speak­ing, Lyra, why I haven’t pun­ished you be­fore…

“Then go ahead! Pun­ish me, since you can! Take your bloody spurs and dig ‘em in hard, go on! Here’s my hand, do it! You got no idea what’s in my heart, you proud, self­ish crea­ture, you got no no­tion how I feel sad and wicked and sor­ry about my friend Roger, you kill peo­ple just like that, she snapped her fin­ger, “they don’t mat­ter to you, but it’s a tor­ment and a sor­row to me that I nev­er said good­bye to him, and I want to say sor­ry and make it as good as I can, you’d nev­er un­der­stand that, for all your pride, for all your grownup clev­er­ness, and if I have to die to do what’s prop­er, then I will, and be hap­py while I do. I seen worse than that. So if you want to kill me, you hard man, you strong man, you poi­son bear­er, you Che­va­li­er, you do it, go on, kill me. Then me and Roger can play in the land of the dead for­ev­er, and laugh at you, you piti­ful thing.”

What Tialys might have done then wasn’t hard to see, for he was ablaze from head to foot with a pas­sion­ate anger, shak­ing with it; but he didn’t have time to move be­fore a voice spoke be­hind Lyra, and they both felt a chill fall over them. Lyra turned around, know­ing what she’d see and dread­ing it de­spite her bra­va­do.

The death stood very close, smil­ing kind­ly, his face ex­act­ly like those of all the oth­ers she’d seen; but this was hers, her very own death, and Pan­ta­lai­mon at her breast howled and shiv­ered, and his er­mine shape flowed up around her neck and tried to push her away from the death. But by do­ing that, he on­ly pushed him­self clos­er, and re­al­iz­ing it, he shrank back to­ward her again, to her warm throat and the strong pulse of her heart.

Lyra clutched him to her and faced the death di­rect­ly. She couldn’t re­mem­ber what he’d said, and out of the cor­ner of her eye, she could see Tialys quick­ly prepar­ing the lode­stone res­ona­tor, busy.

“You’re my death, en’t you?” she said.

“Yes, my dear,” he said.

“You en’t go­ing to take me yet, are you?”

“You want­ed me. I am al­ways here.”

“Yes, but… I did, yes, but… I want to go to the land of the dead, that’s true. But not to die. I don’t want to die. I love be­ing alive, and I love my dae­mon, and … Dae­mons don’t go down there, do they? I seen ‘em van­ish and just go out like can­dles when peo­ple die. Do they have dae­mons in the land of the dead?”

“No,” he said. “Your dae­mon van­ish­es in­to the air, and you van­ish un­der the ground.”

“Then I want to take my dae­mon with me when I go to the land of the dead,” she said firm­ly. “And I want to come back again. Has it ev­er been known, for peo­ple to do that?”

“Not for many, many ages. Even­tu­al­ly, child, you will come to the land of the dead with no ef­fort, no risk, a safe, calm jour­ney, in the com­pa­ny of your own death, your spe­cial, de­vot­ed friend, who’s been be­side you ev­ery mo­ment of your life, who knows you bet­ter than your­self…

“But Pan­ta­lai­mon is my spe­cial and de­vot­ed friend! I don’t know you, Death, I know Pan and I love Pan and if he ev­er, if we ev­er…

The death was nod­ding. He seemed in­ter­est­ed and kind­ly, but she couldn’t for a mo­ment for­get what he was: her very own death, and so close.

“I know it’ll be an ef­fort to go on now,” she said more stea­di­ly, “and dan­ger­ous, but I want to, Death, I do tru­ly. And so does Will. We both had peo­ple tak­en away too soon, and we need to make amends, at least I do.”

“Ev­ery­one wish­es they could speak again to those who’ve gone to the land of the dead. Why should there be an ex­cep­tion for you?”

“Be­cause,” she be­gan, ly­ing, “be­cause there’s some­thing I’ve got to do there, not just see­ing my friend Roger, some­thing else. It was a task put on me by an an­gel, and no one else can do it, on­ly me. It’s too im­por­tant to wait till I die in the nat­ural way, it’s got to be done now. See, the an­gel com­mand­ed me. That’s why we came here, me and Will. We got to.”

Be­hind her, Tialys put away his in­stru­ment and sat watch­ing the child plead with her own death to be tak­en where no one should go.

The death scratched his head and held up his hands, but noth­ing could stop Lyra’s words, noth­ing could de­flect her de­sire, not even fear: she’d seen worse than death, she claimed, and she had, too.

So even­tu­al­ly her death said:

“If noth­ing can put you off, then all I can say is, come with me, and I will take you there, in­to the land of the dead. I’ll be your guide. I can show you the way in, but as for get­ting out again, you’ll have to man­age by your­self.”

“And my friends,” said Lyra. “My friend Will and the oth­ers.”

“Lyra,” said Tialys, “against ev­ery in­stinct, we’ll go with you. I was an­gry with you a minute ago. But you make it hard…”

Lyra knew that this was a time to con­cil­iate, and she was hap­py to do that, hav­ing got­ten her way.

“Yes,” she said, “I am sor­ry, Tialys, but if you hadn’t got an­gry, we’d nev­er have found this gen­tle­man to guide us. So I’m glad you were here, you and the La­dy, I’m re­al­ly grate­ful to you for be­ing with us.”

So Lyra per­suad­ed her own death to guide her and the oth­ers in­to the land where Roger had gone, and Will’s fa­ther, and Tony Makar­ios, and so many oth­ers; and her death told her to go down to the jet­ty when the first light came to the sky, and pre­pare to leave.

But Pan­ta­lai­mon was trem­bling and shiv­er­ing, and noth­ing Lyra could do could soothe him in­to still­ness, or qui­et the soft lit­tle moan he couldn’t help ut­ter­ing. So her sleep was bro­ken and shal­low, on the floor of the shack with all the oth­er sleep­ers, and her death sat watch­ful­ly be­side her.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY - CLIMBING


The mule­fa made many kinds of rope and cord, and Mary Mal­one spent a morn­ing in­spect­ing and test­ing the ones Atal’s fam­ily had in their stores be­fore choos­ing what she want­ed. The prin­ci­ple of twist­ing and wind­ing hadn’t caught on in their world, so all the cords and ropes were braid­ed; but they were strong and flex­ible, and Mary soon found ex­act­ly the sort she want­ed.

What are you do­ing? said Atal.

The mule­fa had no term for climb, so Mary had to do a lot of ges­tur­ing and round­about ex­plain­ing. Atal was hor­ri­fied.

To go in­to the high part of the trees?

I must see what is hap­pen­ing, Mary ex­plained. Now you can help me pre­pare the rope.

Once in Cal­ifor­nia, Mary had met a math­emati­cian who spent ev­ery week­end climb­ing among the trees. Mary had done a lit­tle rock climb­ing, and she’d lis­tened avid­ly as he had talked about the tech­niques and equip­ment. She had de­cid­ed to try it her­self as soon as she had the chance. Of course she’d nev­er ex­pect­ed to be climb­ing trees in an­oth­er uni­verse, and climb­ing so­lo didn’t great­ly ap­peal, ei­ther, but there was no choice about that. What she could do was make it as safe as pos­si­ble be­fore­hand.

She took a coil long enough to reach over one of the branch­es of a high tree and back down to the ground, and strong enough to bear sev­er­al times her weight. Then she cut a large num­ber of short pieces of a small­er but very tough cord and made slings with them: short loops tied with a fish­er­man’s knot, which could make hand- and footholds when she tied them to the main line.

Then there was the prob­lem of get­ting the rope over the branch in the first place. An hour or two’s ex­per­iment­ing with some fine tough cord and a length of springy branch pro­duced a bow; the Swiss Army knife cut some ar­rows, with stiff leaves in place of feath­ers to sta­bi­lize them in flight; and fi­nal­ly, af­ter a day’s work, Mary was ready to be­gin. But the sun was set­ting, and her hands were tired, and she ate and slept, pre­oc­cu­pied, while the mule­fa dis­cussed her end­less­ly in their qui­et, mu­si­cal whis­pers.

First thing in the morn­ing, she set off to shoot an ar­row over a branch. Some of the mule­fa gath­ered to watch, anx­ious for her safe­ty. Climb­ing was so alien to crea­tures with wheels that the very thought of it hor­ri­fied them.

Pri­vate­ly Mary knew how they felt. She sw­al­lowed her ner­vous­ness and tied an end of the thinnest, light­est line to one of her ar­rows, and sent it fly­ing up­ward from the bow.

She lost the first ar­row: it stuck in the bark part­way up and wouldn’t come out. She lost the sec­ond be­cause, al­though it did clear the branch, it didn’t fall far enough to reach the ground on the oth­er side, and pulling it back, she caught it and snapped it. The long line fell back at­tached to the bro­ken shaft, and she tried again with the third and last, and this time it worked.

Pulling care­ful­ly and stea­di­ly so as not to snag the line and break it, she hauled the pre­pared rope up and over un­til both ends were on the ground. Then she tied them both se­cure­ly to a mas­sive but­tress of one of the roots, as thick around as her own hips. So it should be fair­ly sol­id, she thought. It had bet­ter be. What she couldn’t tell from the ground, of course, was what kind of branch the whole thing, in­clud­ing her, would be de­pend­ing on. Un­like climb­ing on rock, where you could fas­ten the rope to pitons on the cliff face ev­ery few yards so you nev­er had far to fall, this busi­ness in­volved one very long free length of rope, and one very long fall if any­thing went wrong. To make her­self a lit­tle more se­cure, she braid­ed to­geth­er three small ropes in­to a har­ness, and passed it around both hang­ing ends of the main rope with a loose knot that she could tight­en the mo­ment she be­gan to slip.

Mary put her foot in the first sling and be­gan to climb.

She reached the canopy in less time than she’d an­tic­ipat­ed. The climb­ing was straight­for­ward, the rope was kind­ly on her hands, and al­though she hadn’t want­ed to think about the prob­lem of get­ting on top of the first branch, she found that the deep fis­sures in the bark helped her to get a sol­id pur­chase and feel se­cure. In fact, on­ly fif­teen min­utes af­ter she’d left the ground, she was stand­ing on the first branch and plan­ning her route to the next.

She had brought two more coils of rope with her, in­tend­ing to make a web of fixed lines to serve in place of the pitons and an­chors and “friends” and oth­er hard­ware she re­lied on when climb­ing a rock face. Ty­ing them in place took her some min­utes more, and once she’d se­cured her­self, she chose what looked like the most promis­ing branch, coiled her spare rope again, and set off.

Af­ter ten min­utes’ care­ful climb­ing she found her­self right in the thick­est part of the canopy. She could reach the long leaves and run them through her hands; she found flow­er af­ter flow­er, of­fwhite and ab­surd­ly small, each grow­ing the lit­tle coin­sized thing that would lat­er be­come one of those great iron­hard seed­pods.

She reached a com­fort­able spot where three branch­es forked, tied the rope se­cure­ly, ad­just­ed her har­ness, and rest­ed.

Through the gaps in the leaves, she could see the blue sea, clear and sparkling as far as the hori­zon; and in the oth­er di­rec­tion over her right shoul­der, she could see the suc­ces­sion of low ris­es in the gold­brown prairie, laced across by the black high­ways.

There was a light breeze, which lift­ed a faint scent out of the flow­ers and rus­tled the stiff leaves, and Mary imag­in­ed a huge, dim benev­olence hold­ing her up, like a pair of gi­ant hands. As she lay in the fork of the great branch­es, she felt a kind of bliss she had on­ly felt once be­fore; and that was not when she made her vows as a nun.

Even­tu­al­ly she was brought back to her nor­mal state of mind by a cramp in her right an­kle, which was rest­ing awk­ward­ly in the crook of the fork. She eased it away and turned her at­ten­tion to the task, still dizzy from the sense of ocean­ic glad­ness that sur­round­ed her.

She’d ex­plained to the mule­fa how she had to hold the saplac­quer plates a hand span apart in or­der to see the sraf and at once they’d seen the prob­lem and made a short tube of bam­boo, fix­ing the am­bercol­ored plates at each end like a tele­scope. This spy­glass was tucked in her breast pock­et, and she took it out now. When she looked through it, she saw those drift­ing gold­en sparkles, the sraf, the Shad­ows, Lyra’s Dust, like a vast cloud of tiny be­in­gs float­ing through the wind. For the most part they drift­ed ran­dom­ly like dust motes in a shaft of sun­light, or molecules in a glass of wa­ter.

For the most part.

But the longer she looked, the more she be­gan to see an­oth­er kind of mo­tion. Un­der­ly­ing the ran­dom drift­ing was a deep­er, slow­er, uni­ver­sal move­ment, out from the land to­ward the sea.

Well, that was cu­ri­ous. Se­cur­ing her­self to one of her fixed ropes, she crawled out along a hor­izon­tal branch, look­ing close­ly at all the flow­er heads she could find. And present­ly she be­gan to see what was hap­pen­ing. She watched and wait­ed till she was per­fect­ly sure, and then be­gan the care­ful, lengthy, stren­uous pro­cess of climb­ing down.

Mary found the mule­fa in a fear­ful state, hav­ing suf­fered a thou­sand anx­ieties for their friend so far off the ground.

Atal was es­pe­cial­ly re­lieved, and touched her ner­vous­ly all over with her trunk, ut­ter­ing gen­tle whin­nies of plea­sure to find her safe, and car­ry­ing her swift­ly down to the set­tle­ment along with a dozen or so oth­ers.

A soon as they came over the brow of the hill, the call went out among those in the vil­lage, and by the time they reached the speak­ing ground, the throng was so thick that Mary guessed there were many vis­itors from else­where, come to hear what she said. She wished she had bet­ter news for them.

The old za­lif Sat­ta­max mount­ed the plat­form and wel­comed her warm­ly, and she re­spond­ed with all the mule­fa cour­tesy she could re­mem­ber. As soon as the greet­in­gs were over, she be­gan to speak.

Halt­ing­ly and with many round­about phras­in­gs, she said:

My good friends, I have been in­to the high canopy of your trees and looked close­ly at the grow­ing leaves and the young flow­ers and the seed­pods.

I could see that there is a cur­rent of sraf high in the tree­tops, she went on, and it moves against the wind. The air is mov­ing in­land off the sea, but the sraf is mov­ing slow­ly against it. Can you see that from the ground? Be­cause I could not.

No, said Sat­ta­max. That is the first we ev­er heard about that.

Well, she con­tin­ued, the trees are fil­ter­ing the sraf as it moves through them, and some of it is at­tract­ed to the flow­ers. I could see it hap­pen­ing: the flow­ers are turned up­ward, and if the sraf were fail­ing straight down, it would en­ter their petals and fer­til­ize them like pollen from the stars.

But the sraf isn’t falling down, it’s mov­ing out to­ward the sea. When a flow­er hap­pens to be fac­ing the land, the sraf can en­ter it. That’s why there are still some seed­pods grow­ing. But most of them face up­ward, and the sraf just drifts past with­out en­ter­ing. The flow­ers must have evolved like that be­cause in the past all the sraf fell straight down. Some­thing has hap­pened to the sraf, not to the trees. And you can on­ly see that cur­rent from high up, which is why you nev­er knew about it.

So if you want to save the trees, and mule­fa life, we must find out why the sraf is do­ing that. I can’t think of away yet, but I will try.

She saw many of them cran­ing to look up­ward at this drift of Dust. But from the ground you couldn’t see it: she looked through the spy­glass her­self, but the dense blue of the sky was all she could see.

They spoke for a long time, try­ing to re­call any men­tion of the srafwind among their leg­ends and his­to­ries, but there was none. All they had ev­er known was that sraf came from the stars, as it had al­ways done.

Fi­nal­ly they asked if she had any more ideas, and she said:

I need to make more ob­ser­va­tions. I need to find out whether the wind goes al­ways in that di­rec­tion or whether it al­ters like the air cur­rents dur­ing the day and the night. So I need to spend more time in the tree­tops, and sleep up there and ob­serve at night. I will need your help to build a plat­form of some kind so I can sleep safe­ly. But we do need more ob­ser­va­tions.

The mule­fa, prac­ti­cal and anx­ious to find out, of­fered at once to build her what­ev­er she need­ed. They knew the tech­niques of us­ing pul­leys and tack­le, and present­ly one sug­gest­ed a way of lift­ing Mary eas­ily in­to the canopy so as to save her the dan­ger­ous la­bor of climb­ing.

Glad to have some­thing to do, they set about gath­er­ing ma­te­ri­als at once, braid­ing and ty­ing and lash­ing spars and ropes and lines un­der her guid­an­ce, and as­sem­bling ev­ery­thing she need­ed for a tree­top ob­ser­va­tion plat­form.

Af­ter speak­ing to the old cou­ple by the olive grove, Fa­ther Gomez lost the track. He spent sev­er­al days search­ing and in­quir­ing in ev­ery di­rec­tion, but the wom­an seemed to have van­ished com­plete­ly.

He would nev­er have giv­en up, al­though it was dis­cour­ag­ing; the cru­ci­fix around his neck and the ri­fle at his back were twin to­kens of his ab­so­lute de­ter­mi­na­tion to com­plete the task.

But it would have tak­en him much longer if it hadn’t been for a dif­fer­ence in the weath­er. In the world he was in, it was hot and dry, and he was in­creas­ing­ly thirsty; and see­ing a wet patch of rock at the top of a scree, he climbed up to see if there was a spring there. There wasn’t, but in the world of the wheel­pod trees, there had just been a show­er of rain; and so it was that he dis­cov­ered the win­dow and found where Mary had gone.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-ONE - THE HARPIES


Lyra and Will each awoke with a heavy dread: it was like be­ing a con­demned pris­on­er on the morn­ing fixed for the ex­ecu­tion. Tialys and Salmakia were at­tend­ing to their drag­on­flies, bring­ing them moths las­soed near the an­bar­ic lamp over the oil drum out­side, flies cut from spi­der­webs, and wa­ter in a tin plate. When she saw the ex­pres­sion on Lyra’s face and the way that Pan­ta­lai­mon, mouse­formed, was press­ing him­self close to her breast, the La­dy Salmakia left what she was do­ing to come and speak with her. Will, mean­while, left the hut to walk about out­side.

“You can still de­cide dif­fer­ent­ly,” said Salmakia.

“No, we can’t. We de­cid­ed al­ready,” said Lyra, stub­born and fear­ful at once.

“And if we don’t come back?”

“You don’t have to come,” Lyra point­ed out.

“We’re not go­ing to aban­don you.”

“Then what if you don’t come back?”

“We shall have died do­ing some­thing im­por­tant.”

Lyra was silent. She hadn’t re­al­ly looked at the La­dy be­fore; but she could see her very clear­ly now, in the smoky light of the naph­tha lamp, stand­ing on the ta­ble just an arm’s length away. Her face was calm and kind­ly, not beau­ti­ful, not pret­ty, but the very sort of face you would be glad to see if you were ill or un­hap­py or fright­ened. Her voice was low and ex­pres­sive, with a cur­rent of laugh­ter and hap­pi­ness un­der the clear sur­face. In all the life she could re­mem­ber, Lyra had nev­er been read to in bed; no one had told her sto­ries or sung nurs­ery rhymes with her be­fore kiss­ing her and putting out the light. But she sud­den­ly thought now that if ev­er there was a voice that would lap you in safe­ty and warm you with love, it would be a voice like the La­dy Salmakia’s, and she felt a wish in her heart to have a child of her own, to lull and soothe and sing to, one day, in a voice like that.

“Well,” Lyra said, and found her throat choked, so she sw­al­lowed and shrugged.

“We’ll see,” said the La­dy, and turned back.

Once they had eat­en their thin, dry bread and drunk their bit­ter tea, which was all the peo­ple had to of­fer them, they thanked their hosts, took their ruck­sacks, and set off through the shan­ty town for the lakeshore. Lyra looked around for her death, and sure enough, there he was, walk­ing po­lite­ly a lit­tle way ahead; but he didn’t want to come clos­er, though he kept look­ing back to see if they were fol­low­ing.

The day was over­hung with a gloomy mist. It was more like dusk than day­light, and wraiths and stream­ers of the fog rose dis­mal­ly from pud­dles in the road, or clung like for­lorn lovers to the an­bar­ic ca­bles over­head. They saw no peo­ple, and few deaths, but the drag­on­flies skimmed through the damp air, as if they were sewing it all to­geth­er with in­vis­ible threads, and it was a de­light to the eyes to watch their bright col­ors flash­ing back and forth.

Be­fore long they had reached the edge of the set­tle­ment and made their way be­side a slug­gish stream through baretwigged scrub­by bush­es. Oc­ca­sion­al­ly they would hear a harsh croak or a splash as some am­phib­ian was dis­turbed, but the on­ly crea­ture they saw was a toad as big as Will’s foot, which could on­ly flop in a painfilled side­ways heave as if it were hor­ri­bly in­ju­red. It lay across the path, try­ing to move out of the way and look­ing at them as if it knew they meant to hurt it.

“It would be mer­ci­ful to kill it,” said Tialys. “How do you know?” said Lyra. “It might still like be­ing alive, in spite of ev­ery­thing.”

“If we killed it, we’d be tak­ing it with us,” said Will. “It wants to stay here. I’ve killed enough liv­ing things. Even a filthy stag­nant pool might be bet­ter than be­ing dead.”

“But if it’s in pain?” said Tialys.

“If it could tell us, we’d know. But since it can’t, I’m not go­ing to kill it. That would be con­sid­er­ing our feel­in­gs rather than the toad’s.”

They moved on. Be­fore long the chang­ing sound their foot­steps made told them that there was an open­ness near­by, al­though the mist was even thick­er. Pan­ta­lai­mon was a lemur, with the biggest eyes he could man­age, cling­ing to Lyra’s shoul­der, press­ing him­self in­to her fog­pearled hair, peer­ing all around and see­ing no more than she did. And still he was trem­bling and trem­bling.

Sud­den­ly they all heard a lit­tle wave break­ing. It was qui­et, but it was very close by. The drag­on­flies re­turned with their rid­ers to the chil­dren, and Pan­ta­lai­mon crept in­to Lyra’s breast as she and Will moved clos­er to­geth­er, tread­ing care­ful­ly along the slimy path.

And then they were at the shore. The oily, scum­my wa­ter lay still in front of them, an oc­ca­sion­al rip­ple break­ing lan­guid­ly on the peb­bles.

The path turned to the left, and a lit­tle way along, more like a thick­en­ing of the mist than a sol­id ob­ject, a wood­en jet­ty stood crazi­ly out over the wa­ter. The piles were de­cayed and the planks were green with slime, and there was noth­ing else; noth­ing be­yond it; the path end­ed where the jet­ty be­gan, and where the jet­ty end­ed, the mist be­gan. Lyra’s death, hav­ing guid­ed them there, bowed to her and stepped in­to the fog, van­ish­ing be­fore she could ask him what to do next.

“Lis­ten,” said Will.

There was a slow, repet­itive sound out on the in­vis­ible wa­ter: a creak of wood and a qui­et, reg­ular splash. Will put his hand on the knife at his belt and moved for­ward care­ful­ly on­to the rot­ting planks. Lyra fol­lowed close be­hind. The drag­on­flies perched on the two weed­cov­ered moor­ing posts, look­ing like heraldic guardians, and the chil­dren stood at the end of the jet­ty, press­ing their open eyes against the mist, and hav­ing to brush their lash­es free of the drops that set­tled on them. The on­ly sound was that slow creak and splash that was get­ting clos­er and clos­er.

“Don’t let’s go!” Pan­ta­lai­mon whis­pered.

“Got to,” Lyra whis­pered back.

She looked at Will. His face was set hard and grim and ea­ger: he wouldn’t turn aside. And the Gal­livespi­ans, Tialys on Will’s shoul­der, Salmakia on Lyra’s, were calm and watch­ful. The drag­on­flies’ wings were pearled with mist, like cob­webs, and from time to time they’d beat them quick­ly to clear them, be­cause the drops must make them heavy, Lyra thought. She hoped there would be food for them in the land of the dead.

Then sud­den­ly there was the boat.

It was an an­cient row­boat, bat­tered, patched, rot­ting; and the fig­ure row­ing it was aged be­yond age, hud­dled in a robe of sack­ing bound with string, crip­pled and bent, his bony hands crooked per­ma­nent­ly around the oar han­dles, and his moist, pale eyes sunk deep among folds and wrin­kles of gray skin.

He let go of an oar and reached his crooked hand up to the iron ring set in the post at the cor­ner of the jet­ty. With the oth­er hand he moved the oar to bring the boat right up against the planks.

There was no need to speak. Will got in first, and then Lyra came for­ward to step down, too.

But the boat­man held up his hand.

“Not him,” he said in a harsh whis­per.

“Not who?”

“Not him.”

He ex­tend­ed a yel­lowgray ringer, point­ing di­rect­ly at Pan­ta­lai­mon, whose red­brown stoat form im­me­di­ate­ly be­came er­mine white.

“But he is me!” Lyra said.

“If you come, he must stay.”

“But we can’t! We’d die!”

“Isn’t that what you want?”

And then for the first time Lyra tru­ly re­al­ized what she was do­ing. This was the re­al con­se­quence. She stood aghast, trem­bling, and clutched her dear dae­mon so tight­ly that he whim­pered in pain.

“They…” said Lyra help­less­ly, then stopped: it wasn’t fair to point out that the oth­er three didn’t have to give any­thing up.

Will was watch­ing her anx­ious­ly. She looked all around, at the lake, at the jet­ty, at the rough path, the stag­nant pud­dles, the dead and sod­den bush­es… Her Pan, alone here: how could he live with­out her? He was shak­ing in­side her shirt, against her bare flesh, his fur need­ing her warmth. Im­pos­si­ble! Nev­er!

“He must stay here if you are to come,” the boat­man said again.

The La­dy Salmakia flicked the rein, and her drag­on­fly skimmed away from Lyra’s shoul­der to land on the gun­wale of the boat, where Tialys joined her. They said some­thing to the boat­man. Lyra watched as a con­demned pris­on­er watch­es the stir at the back of the court­room that might be a mes­sen­ger with a par­don.

The boat­man bent to lis­ten and then shook his head.

“No,” he said. “If she comes, he has to stay.”

Will said, “That’s not right. We don’t have to leave part of our­selves be­hind. Why should Lyra?”

“Oh, but you do,” said the boat­man. “It’s her mis­for­tune that she can see and talk to the part she must leave. You will not know un­til you are on the wa­ter, and then it will be too late. But you all have to leave that part of your­selves here. There is no pas­sage to the land of the dead for such as him.”

No, Lyra thought, and Pan­ta­lai­mon thought with her: We didn’t go through Bolvan­gar for this, no; how will we ev­er find each oth­er again?

And she looked back again at the foul and dis­mal shore, so bleak and blast­ed with dis­ease and poi­son, and thought of her dear Pan wait­ing there alone, her heart’s com­pan­ion, watch­ing her dis­ap­pear in­to the mist, and she fell in­to a storm of weep­ing. Her pas­sion­ate sobs didn’t echo, be­cause the mist muf­fled them, but all along the shore in in­nu­mer­able ponds and shal­lows, in wretched bro­ken tree stumps, the dam­aged crea­tures that lurked there heard her full­heart­ed cry and drew them­selves a lit­tle clos­er to the ground, afraid of such pas­sion.

“If he could come… cried Will, des­per­ate to end her grief, but the boat­man shook his head.

“He can come in the boat, but if he does, the boat stays here,” he said.

“But how will she find him again?”

“I don’t know.”

“When we leave, will we come back this way?”

“Leave?”

“We’re go­ing to come back. We’re go­ing to the land of the dead and we are go­ing to come back.”

“Not this way.”

“Then some oth­er way, but we will!”

“I have tak­en mil­li­ons, and none came back.”

“Then we shall be the first. We’ll find our way out. And since we’re go­ing to do that, be kind, boat­man, be com­pas­sion­ate, let her take her dae­mon!”

“No,” he said, and shook his an­cient head. “It’s not a rule you can break. It’s a law like this one…” He leaned over the side and cupped a hand­ful of wa­ter, and then tilt­ed his hand so it ran out again. “The law that makes the wa­ter fall back in­to the lake, it’s a law like that. I can’t tilt my hand and make the wa­ter fly up­ward. No more can I take her dae­mon to the land of the dead. Whether or not she comes, he must stay.”

Lyra could see noth­ing: her face was buried in Pan­ta­lai­mon’s cat fur. But Will saw Tialys dis­mount from his drag­on­fly and pre­pare to spring at the boat­man, and he halfa­greed with the spy’s in­ten­tion; but the old man had seen him, and turned his an­cient head to say:

“How many ages do you think I’ve been fer­ry­ing peo­ple to the land of the dead? D’you think if any­thing could hurt me, it wouldn’t have hap­pened al­ready? D’you think the peo­ple I take come with me glad­ly? They strug­gle and cry, they try to bribe me, they threat­en and fight; noth­ing works. You can’t hurt me, sting as you will. Bet­ter com­fort the child; she’s com­ing; take no no­tice of me.”

Will could hard­ly watch. Lyra was do­ing the cru­elest thing she had ev­er done, hat­ing her­self, hat­ing the deed, suf­fer­ing for Pan and with Pan and be­cause of Pan; try­ing to put him down on the cold path, dis­en­gag­ing his cat claws from her clothes, weep­ing, weep­ing. Will closed his ears: the sound was too un­hap­py to bear. Time af­ter time she pushed her dae­mon away, and still he cried and tried to cling.

She could turn back.

She could say no, this is a bad idea, we mustn’t do it.

She could be true to the heart­deep, lifedeep bond link­ing her to Pan­ta­lai­mon, she could put that first, she could push the rest out of her mind…

But she couldn’t.

“Pan, no one’s done this be­fore,” she whis­pered shiv­er­ing­ly, “but Will says we’re com­ing back and I swear, Pan, I love you, I swear we’re com­ing back, I will, take care, my dear, you’ll be safe, we will come back, and if I have to spend ev­ery minute of my life find­ing you again, I will, I won’t stop, I won’t rest, I won’t, oh, Pan, dear Pan, I’ve got to, I’ve got to…”

And she pushed him away, so that he crouched bit­ter and cold and fright­ened on the mud­dy ground.

What an­imal he was now, Will could hard­ly tell. He seemed to be so young, a cub, a pup­py, some­thing help­less and beat­en, a crea­ture so sunk in mis­ery that it was more mis­ery than crea­ture. His eyes nev­er left Lyra’s face, and Will could see her mak­ing her­self not look away, not avoid the guilt, and he ad­mired her hon­es­ty and her courage at the same time as he was wrenched with the shock of their part­ing. There were so many vivid cur­rents of feel­ing be­tween them that the very air felt elec­tric to him.

And Pan­ta­lai­mon didn’t ask why, be­cause he knew; and he didn’t ask whether Lyra loved Roger more than him, be­cause he knew the true an­swer to that, too. And he knew that if he spoke, she wouldn’t be able to re­sist; so the dae­mon held him­self qui­et so as not to dis­tress the hu­man who was aban­don­ing him, and now they were both pre­tend­ing that it wouldn’t hurt, it wouldn’t be long be­fore they were to­geth­er again, it was all for the best. But Will knew that the lit­tle girl was tear­ing her heart out of her breast.

Then she stepped down in­to the boat. She was so light that it bare­ly rocked at all. She sat be­side Will, and her eyes nev­er left Pan­ta­lai­mon, who stood trem­bling at the shore end of the jet­ty; but as the boat­man let go of the iron ring and swung his oars out to pull the boat away, the lit­tle dog dae­mon trot­ted help­less­ly out to the very end, his claws click­ing soft­ly on the soft planks, and stood watch­ing, just watch­ing, as the boat drew away and the jet­ty fad­ed and van­ished in the mist.

Then Lyra gave a cry so pas­sion­ate that even in that muf­fled, mis­thung world it raised an echo, but of course it wasn’t an echo, it was the oth­er part of her cry­ing in turn from the land of the liv­ing as Lyra moved away in­to the land of the dead.

“My heart, Will…” she groaned, and clung to him, her wet face con­tort­ed with pain.

And thus the prophe­cy that the Mas­ter of Jor­dan Col­lege had made to the Li­brar­ian, that Lyra would make a great be­tray­al and it would hurt her ter­ri­bly, was ful­filled.

But Will, too, found an agony build­ing in­side him, and through the pain he saw that the two Gal­livespi­ans, cling­ing to­geth­er just as he and Lyra were do­ing, were moved by the same an­guish.

Part of it was phys­ical. It felt as if an iron hand had gripped his heart and was pulling it out be­tween his ribs, so that he pressed his hands to the place and vain­ly tried to hold it in. It was far deep­er and far worse than the pain of los­ing his fin­gers. But it was men­tal, too: some­thing se­cret and pri­vate was be­ing dragged in­to the open, where it had no wish to be, and Will was near­ly over­come by a mix­ture of pain and shame and fear and sel­fre­proach, be­cause he him­self had caused it.

And it was worse than that. It was as if he’d said, “No, don’t kill me, I’m fright­ened; kill my moth­er in­stead; she doesn’t mat­ter, I don’t love her,” and as if she’d heard him say it, and pre­tend­ed she hadn’t so as to spare his feel­in­gs, and of­fered her­self in his place any­way be­cause of her love for him. He felt as bad as that. There was noth­ing worse to feel.

So Will knew that all those things were part of hav­ing a dae­mon, and that what­ev­er his dae­mon was, she, too, was left be­hind, with Pan­ta­lai­mon, on that poi­soned and des­olate shore. The thought came to Will and Lyra at the same mo­ment, and they ex­changed a tearfilled glance. And for the sec­ond time in their lives, hut not the last, each of them saw their own ex­pres­sion on the oth­er’s face.

On­ly the boat­man and the drag­on­flies seemed in­dif­fer­ent to the jour­ney they were mak­ing. The great in­sects were ful­ly alive and bright with beau­ty even in the cling­ing mist, shak­ing their filmy wings to dis­lodge the mois­ture; and the old man in his sack­ing robe leaned for­ward and back, for­ward and back, brac­ing his bare feet against the slimepud­dled floor.

The jour­ney last­ed longer than Lyra want­ed to mea­sure. Though part of her was raw with an­guish, imag­in­ing Pan­ta­lai­mon aban­doned on the shore, an­oth­er part was ad­just­ing to the pain, mea­sur­ing her own strength, cu­ri­ous to see what would hap­pen and where they would land.

Will’s arm was strong around her, but he, too, was look­ing ahead, try­ing to peer through the wet gray gloom and to hear any­thing oth­er than the dank splash of the oars. And present­ly some­thing did change: a cliff or an is­land lay ahead of them. They heard the en­clos­ing of the sound be­fore they saw the mist dark­en.

The boat­man pulled on one oar to turn the boat a lit­tle to the left.

“Where are we?” said the voice of the Che­va­li­er Tialys, small but strong as ev­er, though there was a harsh edge to it, as if he, too, had been suf­fer­ing pain.

“Near the is­land,” said the boat­man. “An­oth­er five min­utes, we’ll be at the land­ing stage.”

“What is­land?” said Will. He found his own voice strained, too, so tight it hard­ly seemed his.

“The gate to the land of the dead is on this is­land,” said the boat­man. “Ev­ery­one comes here, kings, queens, mur­der­ers, po­ets, chil­dren; ev­ery­one comes this way, and none come back.”

“We shall come back,” whis­pered Lyra fierce­ly.

He said noth­ing, but his an­cient eyes were full of pity.

As they moved clos­er, they could see branch­es of cy­press and yew hang­ing down low over the wa­ter, dark green, dense, and gloomy. The land rose steeply, and the trees grew so thick­ly that hard­ly a fer­ret could slip be­tween them, and at that thought Lyra gave a lit­tle halfhic­cuphalf­sob, for Pan would have shown her how well he could do it; but not now, maybe not ev­er again.

“Are we dead now?” Will said to the boat­man.

“Makes no dif­fer­ence,” he said. “There’s some that came here nev­er be­liev­ing they were dead. They in­sist­ed all the way that they were alive, it was a mis­take, some­one would have to pay; made no dif­fer­ence. There’s oth­ers who longed to be dead when they were alive, poor souls; lives full of pain or mis­ery; killed them­selves for a chance of a blessed rest, and found that noth­ing had changed ex­cept for the worse, and this time there was no es­cape; you can’t make your­self alive again. And there’s been oth­ers so frail and sick­ly, lit­tle in­fants, some­times, that they’re scarce­ly born in­to the liv­ing be­fore they come down to the dead. I’ve rowed this boat with a lit­tle cry­ing ba­by on my lap many, many times, that nev­er knew the dif­fer­ence be­tween up there and down here. And old folk, too, the rich ones are the worst, snarling and sav­age and curs­ing me, rail­ing and scream­ing: what did I think I was? Hadn’t they gath­ered and saved all the gold they could gar­ner? Wouldn’t I take some now, to put them back ashore? They’d have the law on me, they had pow­er­ful friends, they knew the Pope and the king of this and the duke of that, they were in a po­si­tion to see I was pun­ished and chas­tised… But they knew what the truth was in the end: the on­ly po­si­tion they were in was in my boat go­ing to the land of the dead, and as for those kings and Popes, they’d be in here, too, in their turn, soon­er than they want­ed.

I let ‘em cry and rave; they can’t hurt me; they fall silent in the end.

“So if you don’t know whether you’re dead or not, and the lit­tle girl swears blind she’ll come out again to the liv­ing, I say noth­ing to con­tra­dict you. What you are, you’ll know soon enough.”

All the time he had been stea­di­ly row­ing along the shore, and now he shipped the oars, slip­ping the han­dles down in­side the boat and reach­ing out to his right for the first wood­en post that rose out of the lake.

He pulled the boat along­side the nar­row wharf and held it still for them. Lyra didn’t want to get out: as long as she was near the boat, then Pan­ta­lai­mon would be able to think of her prop­er­ly, be­cause that was how he last saw her, but when she moved away from it, he wouldn’t know how to pic­ture her any­more. So she hes­itat­ed, but the drag­on­flies flew up, and Will got out, pale and clutch­ing his chest; so she had to as well.

“Thank you,” she said to the boat­man. “When you go back, if you see my dae­mon, tell him I love him the best of ev­ery­thing in the land of the liv­ing or the dead, and I swear I’ll come back to him, even if no one’s ev­er done it be­fore, I swear I will.”

“Yes, I’ll tell him that,” said the old boat­man.

He pushed off, and the sound of his slow oar strokes fad­ed away in the mist.

The Gal­livespi­ans flew back, hav­ing gone a lit­tle way, and perched on the chil­dren’s shoul­ders as be­fore, she on Lyra, he on Will. So they stood, the trav­el­ers, at the edge of the land of the dead. Ahead of them there was noth­ing but mist, though they could see from the dark­en­ing of it that a great wall rose in front of them.

Lyra shiv­ered. She felt as if her skin had turned in­to lace and the damp and hit­ter air could flow in and out of her ribs, scald­ing­ly cold on the raw wound where Pan­ta­lai­mon had been. Still, she thought, Roger must have felt like that as he plunged down the moun­tain­side, try­ing to cling to her des­per­ate fin­gers.

They stood still and lis­tened. The on­ly sound was an end­less drip­drip­drip of wa­ter from the leaves, and as they looked up, they felt one or two drops splash cold­ly on their cheeks.

“Can’t stay here,” said Lyra.

They moved off the wharf, keep­ing close to­geth­er, and made their way to the wall. Gi­gan­tic stone blocks, green with an­cient slime, rose high­er in­to the mist than they could see. And now that they were clos­er, they could hear the sound of cries be­hind it, though whether they were hu­man voic­es cry­ing was im­pos­si­ble to tell: high, mourn­ful shrieks and wails that hung in the air like the drift­ing fil­aments of a jel­ly­fish, caus­ing pain wher­ev­er they touched.

“There’s a door,” said Will in a hoarse, strained voice.

It was a bat­tered wood­en postern un­der a slab of stone. Be­fore Will could lift his hand and open it, one of those high, harsh cries sound­ed very close by, jar­ring their ears and fright­en­ing them hor­ri­bly.

Im­me­di­ate­ly the Gal­livespi­ans dart­ed in­to the air, the drag­on­flies like lit­tle warhors­es ea­ger for bat­tle. But the thing that flew down swept them aside with a bru­tal blow from her wing, and then set­tled heav­ily on a ledge just above the chil­dren’s heads. Tialys and Salmakia gath­ered them­selves and soothed their shak­en mounts.

The thing was a great bird the size of a vul­ture, with the face and breasts of a wom­an. Will had seen pic­tures of crea­tures like her, and the word harpy came to mind as soon as he saw her clear­ly. Her face was smooth and un­wrin­kled, but aged be­yond even the age of the witch­es: she had seen thou­sands of years pass, and the cru­el­ty and mis­ery of all of them had formed the hate­ful ex­pres­sion on her fea­tures. But as the trav­el­ers saw her more clear­ly, she be­came even more re­pul­sive. Her eye sock­ets were clot­ted with filthy slime, and the red­ness of her lips was caked and crust­ed as if she had vom­it­ed an­cient blood again and again. Her mat­ted, filthy black hair hung down to her shoul­ders; her jagged claws gripped the stone fierce­ly; her pow­er­ful dark wings were fold­ed along her back; and a drift of pu­tres­cent stink waft­ed from her ev­ery time she moved.

Will and Lyra, both of them sick and full of pain, tried to stand up­right and face her.

“But you are alive!” the harpy said, her harsh voice mock­ing them.

Will found him­self hat­ing and fear­ing her more than any hu­man be­ing he had ev­er known.

“Who are you?” said Lyra, who was just as re­pelled as Will.

For an­swer the harpy screamed. She opened her mouth and di­rect­ed a jet of noise right in their faces, so that their heads rang and they near­ly fell back­ward. Will clutched at Lyra and they both clung to­geth­er as the scream turned in­to wild, mock­ing peals of laugh­ter, which were an­swered by oth­er harpy voic­es in the fog along the shore. The jeer­ing, hate­filled sound re­mind­ed Will of the mer­ci­less cru­el­ty of chil­dren in a play­ground, but there were no teach­ers here to reg­ulate things, no one to ap­peal to, nowhere to hide.

He set his hand on the knife at his belt and looked her in the eyes, though his head was ring­ing and the sheer pow­er of her scream had made him dizzy.

“If you’re try­ing to stop us,” he said, “then you’d bet­ter be ready to fight as well as scream. Be­cause we’re go­ing through that door.”

The harpy’s sick­en­ing red mouth moved again, but this time it was to purse her lips in­to a mock kiss.

Then she said, “Your moth­er is alone. We shall send her night­mares. We shall scream at her in her sleep!”

Will didn’t move, be­cause out of the cor­ner of his eye, he could see the La­dy Salmakia mov­ing del­icate­ly along the branch where the harpy was perch­ing. Her drag­on­fly, wings quiv­er­ing, was be­ing held by Tialys on the ground, and then two things hap­pened: the La­dy leapt at the harpy and spun around to dig her spur deep in­to the crea­ture’s scaly leg, and Tialys launched the drag­on­fly up­ward. In less than a sec­ond Salmakia had spun away and leapt off the branch, di­rect­ly on­to the back of her elec­tric blue steed and up in­to the air.

The ef­fect on the harpy was im­me­di­ate. An­oth­er scream shat­tered the si­lence, much loud­er than be­fore, and she beat her dark wings so hard that Will and Lyra both felt the wind and stag­gered. But she clung to the stone with her claws, and her face was suf­fused with dark red anger, and her hair stood out from her head like a crest of ser­pents.

Will tugged at Lyra’s hand, and they both tried to run to­ward the door, but the harpy launched her­self at them in a fury and on­ly pulled up from the dive when Will turned, thrust­ing Lyra be­hind him and hold­ing up the knife.

The Gal­livespi­ans were on her at once, dart­ing close at her face and then dart­ing away again, un­able to get in a blow but dis­tract­ing her so that she beat her wings clum­si­ly and half­fell on­to the ground.

Lyra called out, “Tialys! Salmakia! Stop, stop!”

The spies reined back their drag­on­flies and skimmed high over the chil­dren’s heads. Oth­er dark forms were clus­ter­ing in the fog, and the jeer­ing screams of a hun­dred more harpies sound­ed from far­ther along the shore. The first one was shak­ing her wings, shak­ing her hair, stretch­ing each leg in turn, and flex­ing her claws. She was un­hurt, and that was what Lyra had no­ticed.

The Gal­livespi­ans hov­ered and then dived back to­ward Lyra, who was hold­ing out both hands for them to land on. Salmakia re­al­ized what Lyra had meant, and said to Tialys: “She’s right. We can’t hurt her, for some rea­son.”

Lyra said, “La­dy, what’s your name?”

The harpy shook her wings wide, and the trav­el­ers near­ly faint­ed from the hideous smells of cor­rup­tion and de­cay that waft­ed from her.

“NoN­ame!” she cried.

“What do you want with us?” said Lyra.

“What can you give me?”

“We could tell you where we’ve been, and maybe you’d be in­ter­est­ed, I don’t know. We saw all kinds of strange things on the way here.”

“Oh, and you’re of­fer­ing to tell me a sto­ry?”

“If you’d like.”

“Maybe I would. And what then?”

“You might let us go in through that door and find the ghost we’ve come here to look for; I hope you would, any­way. If you’d be so kind.”

“Try, then,” said NoN­ame.

And even in her sick­ness and pain, Lyra felt that she’d just been dealt the ace of trumps.

“Oh, be care­ful,” whis­pered Salmakia, but Lyra’s mind was al­ready rac­ing ahead through the sto­ry she’d told the night be­fore, shap­ing and cut­ting and im­prov­ing and adding: par­ents dead; fam­ily trea­sure; ship­wreck; es­cape …

“Well,” she said, set­tling in­to her sto­ry­telling frame of mind, “it be­gan when I was a ba­by, re­al­ly. My fa­ther and moth­er were the Duke and Duchess of Abing­don, you see, and they were as rich as any­thing. My fa­ther was one of the king’s ad­vis­ers, and the king him­self used to come and stay, oh, all the time. They’d go hunt­ing in our for­est. The house there, where I was born, it was the biggest house in the whole south of Eng­land. It was called…”

With­out even a cry of warn­ing, the harpy launched her­self at Lyra, claws out­stretched. Lyra just had time to duck, but still one of the claws caught her scalp and tore out a clump of hair.

“Liar! Liar!” the harpy was scream­ing. “Liar!”

She flew around again, aim­ing di­rect­ly for Lyra’s face; but Will took out the knife and threw him­self in the way. NoN­ame swerved out of reach just in time, and Will hus­tled Lyra over to­ward the door, be­cause she was numb with shock and half­blind­ed by the blood run­ning down her face. Where the Gal­livespi­ans were, Will had no idea, but the harpy was fly­ing at them again and scream­ing and scream­ing in rage and ha­tred:

“Liar! Liar! Liar!”

And it sound­ed as if her voice were com­ing from ev­ery­where, and the word echoed back from the great wall in the fog, muf­fled and changed, so that she seemed to be scream­ing Lyra’s name, so that Lyra and liar were one and the same thing.

Will had the girl pressed against his chest, with his shoul­der curved over to pro­tect her, and he felt her shak­ing and sob­bing against him; but then he thrust the knife in­to the rot­ten wood of the door and cut out the lock with a quick slash of the blade.

Then he and Lyra, with the spies be­side them on their dart­ing drag­on­flies, tum­bled through in­to the realm of the ghosts as the harpy’s cry was dou­bled and re­dou­bled by oth­ers on the fog­gy shore be­hind them.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-TWO - THE WHISPERERS


The first thing Will did was to make Lyra sit down, and then he took out the lit­tle pot of blood­moss oint­ment and looked at the wound on her head. It was bleed­ing freely, as scalp wounds do, but it wasn’t deep. He tore a strip off the edge of his shirt and mopped it clean, and spread some of the oint­ment over the gash, try­ing not to think of the filthy state of the claw that made it.

Lyra’s eyes were glazed, and she was ash­pale.

“Lyra! Lyra!” he said, and shook her gen­tly. “Come on now, we’ve got to move.”

She gave a shud­der and took a long, shaky breath, and her eyes fo­cused on him, full of a wild de­spair.

“Will, I can’t do it any­more, I can’t do it! I can’t tell lies! I thought it was so easy, but it didn’t work, it’s all I can do, and it doesn’t work!”

“It’s not all you can do. You can read the alethiome­ter, can’t you? Come on, let’s see where we are. Let’s look for Roger.”

He helped her up, and for the first time they looked around at the land where the ghosts were.

They found them­selves on a great plain that ex­tend­ed far ahead in­to the mist. The light by which they saw was a dull self­lu­mi­nes­cence that seemed to ex­ist ev­ery­where equal­ly, so that there were no true shad­ows and no true light, and ev­ery­thing was the same dingy col­or.

Stand­ing on the floor of this huge space were adults and chil­dren, ghost peo­ple, so many that Lyra couldn’t guess their num­ber. At least, most of them were stand­ing, though some were sit­ting and some ly­ing down list­less or asleep. No one was mov­ing about, or run­ning or play­ing, though many of them turned to look at these new ar­ri­vals, with a fear­ful cu­rios­ity in their wide eyes.

“Ghosts,” she whis­pered. “This is where they all are, ev­ery­one that’s ev­er died…”

No doubt it was be­cause she didn’t have Pan­ta­lai­mon any­more, but she clung close to Will’s arm, and he was glad she did. The Gal­livespi­ans had flown ahead, and he could see their bright lit­tle forms dart­ing and skim­ming over the heads of the ghosts, who looked up and fol­lowed them with won­der; but the si­lence was im­mense and op­pres­sive, and the gray light filled him with fear, and Lyra’s warm pres­ence be­side him was the on­ly thing that felt like life.

Be­hind them, out­side the wall, the screams of the harpies were still echo­ing up and down the shore. Some of the ghost peo­ple were look­ing up ap­pre­hen­sive­ly, but more of them were star­ing at Will and Lyra, and then they be­gan to crowd for­ward. Lyra shrank back; she didn’t have the strength just yet to face them as she would have liked to do, and it was Will who had to speak first.

“Do you speak our lan­guage?” he said. “Can you speak at all?”

Shiv­er­ing and fright­ened and full of pain as he and Lyra were, they had more au­thor­ity than the whole mass of the dead put to­geth­er. These poor ghosts had lit­tle pow­er of their own, and hear­ing Will’s voice, the first clear voice that had sound­ed there in all the mem­ory of the dead, many of them came for­ward, ea­ger to re­spond.

But they could on­ly whis­per. A faint, pale sound, no more than a soft breath, was all they could ut­ter. And as they thrust for­ward, jostling and des­per­ate, the Gal­livespi­ans flew down and dart­ed to and from in front of them, to pre­vent them from crowd­ing too close. The ghost chil­dren looked up with a pas­sion­ate long­ing, and Lyra knew at once why: they thought the drag­on­flies were dae­mons; they were wish­ing with all their hearts that they could hold their own dae­mons again.

“Oh, they en’t dae­mons,” Lyra burst out com­pas­sion­ate­ly; “and if my own dae­mon was here, you could all stroke him and touch him, I promise…

And she held out her hands to the chil­dren. The adult ghosts hung back, list­less or fear­ful, but the chil­dren all came throng­ing for­ward. They had as much sub­stance as fog, poor things, and Lyra’s hands passed through and through them, as did Will’s. They crammed for­ward, light and life­less, to warm them­selves at the flow­ing blood and the strong­beat­ing hearts of the two trav­el­ers, and both Will and Lyra felt a suc­ces­sion of cold, del­icate brush­ing sen­sa­tions as the ghosts passed through their bod­ies, warm­ing them­selves on the way. The two liv­ing chil­dren felt that lit­tle by lit­tle they were be­com­ing dead, too; they hadn’t got an in­fi­nite amount of life and warmth to give, and they were so cold al­ready, and the end­less crowds press­ing for­ward looked as if they were nev­er go­ing to stop.

Fi­nal­ly Lyra had to plead with them to hold back.

She held up her hands and said, “Please, we wish we could touch you all, but we came down here to look for some­one, and I need you to tell me where he is and how to find him. Oh, Will,” she said, lean­ing her head to his, “I wish I knew what to do!”

The ghosts were fas­ci­nat­ed by the blood on Lyra’s fore­head. It glowed as bright­ly as a hol­ly berry in the dim­ness, and sev­er­al of them had brushed through it, long­ing for the con­tact with some­thing so vi­brant­ly alive. One ghost girl, who when she was alive must have been about nine or ten, reached up shy­ly to try and touch it, and then shrank back in fear; but Lyra said, “Don’t be afraid, we en’t come here to hurt you, speak to us, if you can!”

The ghost girl spoke, but in her thin, pale voice, it was on­ly a whis­per.

“Did the harpies do that? Did they try and hurt you?”

“Yeah,” said Lyra, “but if that’s all they can do, I en’t wor­ried about them.”

“Oh, it isn’t, oh, they do worse…

“What? What do they do?”

But they were re­luc­tant to tell her. They shook their heads and kept silent, un­til one boy said, “It en’t so bad for them that’s been here hun­dreds of years, be­cause you get tired af­ter all that time, they can’t ‘fraid you up so much…

“It’s the new ones that they like talk­ing to most,” said the first girl. “It’s just.. .Oh, it’s just hate­ful. They… I can’t tell you.”

Their voic­es were no loud­er than dry leaves falling. And it was on­ly the chil­dren who spoke; the adults all seemed sunk in a lethar­gy so an­cient that they might nev­er move or speak again.

“Lis­ten,” said Lyra, “please lis­ten. We came here, me and my friends, be­cause we got to find a boy called Roger. He en’t been here long, just a few weeks, so he won’t know very many peo­ple, but if you know where he is…”

But even as she spoke, she knew that they could stay here till they grew old, search­ing ev­ery­where and look­ing at ev­ery face, and still they might nev­er see more than a tiny frac­tion of the dead. She felt de­spair sit on her shoul­ders, as heavy as if the harpy her­self were perch­ing there.

How­ev­er, she clenched her teeth and tried to hold her chin high. We got here, she thought, that’s part of it any­way.

The first ghost girl was say­ing some­thing in that lost lit­tle whis­per.

“Why do we want to find him?” said Will. “Well, Lyra wants to speak to him. But there’s some­one I want to find as well. I want to find my fa­ther, John Par­ry. He’s here, too, some­where, and I want to speak to him be­fore I go back to the world. So please ask, if you can, ask for Roger and for John Par­ry to come and speak to Lyra and to Will. Ask them…

But sud­den­ly the ghosts all turned and fled, even the grownups, like dry leaves scat­tered by a sud­den gust of wind. In a mo­ment the space around the chil­dren was emp­ty, and then they heard why. screams, cries, shrieks came from the air above, and then the harpies were on them, with gusts of rot­ten stink, bat­ter­ing wings, and those rau­cous screams, jeer­ing, mock­ing, cack­ling, de­rid­ing.

Lyra shrank to the ground at once, cov­er­ing her ears, and Will, knife in hand, crouched over her. He could see Tialys and Salmakia skim­ming to­ward them, but they were some way off yet, and he had a mo­ment or two to watch the harpies as they wheeled and dived. He saw their hu­man faces snap at the air, as if they were eat­ing in­sects, and he heard the words they were shout­ing, scoff­ing words, filthy words, all about his moth­er, words that shook his heart; but part of his mind was quite cold and sep­arate, think­ing, cal­cu­lat­ing, ob­serv­ing. None of them want­ed to come any­where near the knife.

To see what would hap­pen, he stood up. One of them, it might have been NoN­ame her­self, had to swerve heav­ily out of the way, be­cause she’d been div­ing low, in­tend­ing to skim just over his head. Her heavy wings beat clum­si­ly, and she on­ly just made the turn. He could have reached out and slashed off her head with the knife.

By this time the Gal­livespi­ans had ar­rived, and the two of them were about to at­tack, but Will called: “Tialys! Come here! Salmakia, come to my hand!”

They land­ed on his shoul­ders, and he said, “Watch. See what they do. They on­ly come and scream. I think it was a mis­take when she hit Lyra. I don’t think they want to touch us at all. We can ig­nore them.”

Lyra looked up, wideeyed. The crea­tures flew around Will’s head, some­times on­ly a foot or so away, but they al­ways swerved aside or up­ward at the last mo­ment. He could sense the two spies ea­ger for bat­tle, and the drag­on­flies’ wings were quiv­er­ing with de­sire to dart through the air with their dead­ly rid­ers, but they held them­selves back: they could see he was right.

And it had an ef­fect on the ghosts, too: see­ing Will stand­ing un­afraid and un­harmed, they be­gan to drift back to­ward the trav­el­ers. They watched the harpies cau­tious­ly, but for all that, the lure of the warm flesh and blood, those strong heart­beats, was too much to re­sist.

Lyra stood up to join Will. Her wound had opened again, and fresh blood was trick­ling down her cheek, but she wiped it aside.

“Will,” she said, “I’m so glad we came down here to­geth­er…”

He heard a tone in her voice and he saw an ex­pres­sion on her face that he knew and liked more than any­thing he’d ev­er known: it showed she was think­ing of some­thing dar­ing, but she wasn’t ready to speak of it yet.

He nod­ded, to show he’d un­der­stood.

The ghost girl said, “This way, come with us, we’ll find them!”

And both of them felt the strangest sen­sa­tion, as if lit­tle ghost hands were reach­ing in­side and tug­ging at their ribs to make them fol­low.

So they set off across the floor of that great des­olate plain, and the harpies wheeled high­er and high­er over­head, scream­ing and scream­ing. But they kept their dis­tance, and the Gal­livespi­ans flew above, keep­ing watch.

As they walked along, the ghosts talked to them.

“Ex­cuse me,” said one ghost girl, “but where’s your dae­mons? Ex­cuse me for ask­ing. But…”

Lyra was con­scious ev­ery sin­gle sec­ond of her dear, aban­doned Pan­ta­lai­mon. She couldn’t speak eas­ily, so Will an­swered in­stead.

“We left our dae­mons out­side,” he said, “where it’s safe for them. We’ll col­lect them lat­er. Did you have a dae­mon?”

“Yes,” said the ghost, “his name was San­dling… oh, I loved him…”

“And had he set­tled?” said Lyra.

“No, not yet. He used to think he’d be a bird, and I hoped he wouldn’t, be­cause I liked him all fur­ry in bed at night. But he was a bird more and more. What’s your dae­mon called?”

Lyra told her, and the ghosts pressed for­ward ea­ger­ly again. They all want­ed to talk about their dae­mons, ev­ery one.

“Mine was called Mat­apan…

“We used to play hide­and­seek, she’d change like a chameleon and I couldn’t see her at all, she was ev­er so good…

“Once I hurt my eye and I couldn’t see and he guid­ed me all the way home…

“He nev­er want­ed to set­tle, but I want­ed to grow up, and we used to ar­gue…

“She used to curl up in my hand and go to sleep…

“Are they still there, some­where else? Will we see them again?”

“No. When you die, your dae­mon just goes out like a can­dle flame. I seen it hap­pen. I nev­er saw my Cas­tor, though, I nev­er said good­bye…

“They en’t nowhere! They must be some­where! My dae­mons still there some­where, I know he is!”

The jostling ghosts were an­imat­ed and ea­ger, their eyes shin­ing and their cheeks warm, as if they were bor­row­ing life from the trav­el­ers.

Will said, “Is there any­one here from my world, where we don’t have dae­mons?”

A thin ghost boy of his own age nod­ded, and Will turned to him.

“Oh yes,” came the an­swer. “We didn’t un­der­stand what dae­mons were, but we knew what it felt like to be with­out them. There’s peo­ple here from all kinds of worlds.”

“I knew my death,” said one girl, “I knew him all the while I was grow­ing up. When I heard them talk about dae­mons, I thought they meant some­thing like our deaths. I miss him now. I won’t nev­er see him again. I’m over and done with, that’s the last thing he said to me, and then he went for­ev­er. When he was with me, I al­ways knew there was some­one I could trust, some­one who knew where we was go­ing and what to do. But I ain’t got him no more. I don’t know what’s go­ing to hap­pen ev­er again.”

“There ain’t noth­ing go­ing to hap­pen!” some­one else said. “Noth­ing, for­ev­er!”

“You don’t know,” said an­oth­er. “They came, didn’t they ? No one ev­er knew that was go­ing to hap­pen.”

She meant Will and Lyra.

“This is the first thing that ev­er hap­pened here,” said a ghost boy. “Maybe it’s all go­ing to change now.”

“What would you do, if you could?” said Lyra.

“Go up to the world again!”

“Even if it meant you could on­ly see it once, would you still want to do that?”

“Yes! Yes! Yes!”

“Well, any­way, I’ve got to find Roger,” said Lyra, burn­ing with her new idea; but it was for Will to know first.

On the floor of the end­less plain, there was a vast, slow move­ment among the un­count­able ghosts. The chil­dren couldn’t see it, but Tialys and Salmakia, fly­ing above, watched the lit­tle pale fig­ures all mov­ing with an ef­fect that looked like the mi­gra­tion of im­mense flocks of birds or herds of rein­deer. At the cen­ter of the move­ment were the two chil­dren who were not ghosts, mov­ing stea­di­ly on; not lead­ing, and not fol­low­ing, but some­how fo­cus­ing the move­ment in­to an in­ten­tion of all the dead.

The spies, their thoughts mov­ing even more quick­ly than their dart­ing steeds, ex­changed a glance and brought the drag­on­flies to rest side by side on a dry, with­ered branch.

“Do we have dae­mons, Tialys?” said the La­dy.

“Since we got in­to that boat, I have felt as if my heart had been torn out and thrown still beat­ing on the shore,” he said. “But it wasn’t; it’s still work­ing in my breast. So some­thing of mine is out there with the lit­tle girl’s dae­mon, and some­thing of yours, too, Salmakia, be­cause your face is drawn and your hands are pale and tight. Yes, we have dae­mons, what­ev­er they are. Maybe the peo­ple in Lyra’s world are the on­ly liv­ing be­in­gs to know they have. Maybe that’s why it was one of them who start­ed the re­volt.”

He slipped off the drag­on­fly’s back and teth­ered it safe­ly, and then took out the lode­stone res­ona­tor. But he had hard­ly be­gun to touch it when he stopped.

“No re­sponse,” he said somber­ly.

“So we’re be­yond ev­ery­thing?”

“Be­yond help, cer­tain­ly. Well, we knew we were com­ing to the land of the dead.”

“The boy would go with her to the end of the world.”

“Will his knife open the way back, do you think?”

“I’m sure he thinks so. But oh, Tialys, I don’t know.”

“He’s very young. Well, they are both young. You know, if she doesn’t sur­vive this, the ques­tion of whether she’ll choose the right thing when she’s tempt­ed won’t arise. It won’t mat­ter any­more.”

“Do you think she’s cho­sen al­ready? When she chose to leave her dae­mon on the shore? Was that the choice she had to make?”

The Che­va­li­er looked down on the slow­mov­ing mil­li­ons on the floor of the land of the dead, all drift­ing af­ter that bright and liv­ing spark Lyra Sil­ver­tongue. He could just make out her hair, the light­est thing in the gloom, and be­side it the boy’s head, black­haired and sol­id and strong.

“No,” he said, “not yet. That’s still to come, what­ev­er it may be.”

“Then we must bring her to it safe­ly.”

“Bring them both. They’re bound to­geth­er now.”

The La­dy Salmakia flicked the cob­we­blight rein, and her drag­on­fly dart­ed off the branch at once and sped down to­ward the liv­ing chil­dren, with the Che­va­li­er close be­hind.

But they didn’t stop with them; hav­ing skimmed low to make sure they were all right, they flew on ahead, part­ly be­cause the drag­on­flies were rest­less, and part­ly be­cause they want­ed to find out how far this dis­mal place ex­tend­ed.

Lyra saw them flash­ing over­head and felt a pang of re­lief that there was still some­thing that dart­ed and glowed with beau­ty. Then, un­able to keep her idea to her­self any­more, she turned to Will; but she had to whis­per. She put her lips to his ear, and in a noisy rush of warmth, he heard her say:

“Will, I want us to take all these poor dead ghost kids out­side, the grownups as well, we could set ‘em free! We’ll find Roger and your fa­ther, and then let’s open the way to the world out­side, and set ‘em all free!”

He turned and gave her a true smile, so warm and hap­py she felt some­thing stum­ble and fal­ter in­side her; at least, it felt like that, but with­out Pan­ta­lai­mon she couldn’t ask her­self what it meant. It might have been a new way for her heart to heat. Deeply sur­prised, she told her­self to walk straight and stop feel­ing gid­dy.

So they moved on. The whis­per Roger was spread­ing out faster than they could move; the words “Roger, Lyra’s come, Roger, Lyra’s here” passed from one ghost to an­oth­er like the elec­tric mes­sage that one cell in the body pass­es on to the next.

And Tialys and Salmakia, cruis­ing above on their tire­less drag­on­flies, and look­ing all around as they flew, even­tu­al­ly no­ticed a new kind of move­ment. Some way off there was a lit­tle gy­ra­tion of ac­tiv­ity. Skim­ming down clos­er, they found them­selves ig­nored, for the first time, be­cause some­thing more in­ter­est­ing was grip­ping the minds of all the ghosts. They were talk­ing ex­cit­ed­ly in their near­si­lent whis­pers, they were point­ing, they were urg­ing some­one for­ward.

Salmakia flew down low, but couldn’t land: the press was too great, and none of their hands or shoul­ders would sup­port her, even if they dared to try. She saw a young ghost boy with an hon­est, un­hap­py face, dazed and puz­zled by what he was be­ing told, and she called out:

“Roger? Is that Roger?”

He looked up, be­mused, ner­vous, and nod­ded.

Salmakia flew back up to her com­pan­ion, and to­geth­er they sped back to Lyra. It was a long way, and hard to nav­igate, but by watch­ing the pat­terns of move­ment, they fi­nal­ly found her.

“There she is,” said Tialys, and called: “Lyra! Lyra! Your friend is there!”

Lyra looked up and held out her hand for the drag­on­fly. The great in­sect land­ed at once, its red and yel­low gleam­ing like enam­el, and its filmy wings stiff and still on ei­ther side. Tialys kept his bal­an­ce as she held him at eye lev­el.

“Where?” she said, breath­less with ex­cite­ment. “Is he far off?”

“An hour’s walk,” said the Che­va­li­er. “But he knows you’re com­ing. The oth­ers have told him, and we made sure it was him. Just keep go­ing, and soon you’ll find him.”

Tialys saw Will make the ef­fort to stand up straight and force him­self to find some more en­er­gy. Lyra was charged with it al­ready, and plied the Gal­livespi­ans with ques­tions: how did Roger seem? Had he spo­ken to them? No, of course; but did he seem glad? Were the oth­er chil­dren aware of what was hap­pen­ing, and were they help­ing, or were they just in the way?

And so on. Tialys tried to an­swer ev­ery­thing truth­ful­ly and pa­tient­ly, and step by step the liv­ing girl drew clos­er to the boy she had brought to his death.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-THREE - NO WAY OUT


“Will,” said Lyra, “what d’you think the harpies will do when we let the ghosts out?”

Be­cause the crea­tures were get­ting loud­er and fly­ing clos­er, and there were more and more of them all the time, as if the gloom were gath­er­ing it­self in­to lit­tle clots of mal­ice and giv­ing them wings. The ghosts kept look­ing up fear­ful­ly.

“Are we get­ting close?” Lyra called to the La­dy Salmakia.

“Not far now,” she called down, hov­er­ing above them. “You could see him if you climbed that rock.”

But Lyra didn’t want to waste time. She was try­ing with all her heart to put on a cheer­ful face for Roger, but ev­ery mo­ment in front of her mind’s eye was that ter­ri­ble im­age of the lit­tle dog­Pan aban­doned on the jet­ty as the mist closed around him, and she could bare­ly keep from howl­ing. She must, though; she must be hope­ful for Roger; she al­ways had been.

When they did come face to face, it hap­pened quite sud­den­ly. In among the press of all the ghosts, there he was, his fa­mil­iar fea­tures wan but his ex­pres­sion as full of de­light as a ghost could be. He rushed to em­brace her.

But he passed like cold smoke through her arms, and though she felt his lit­tle hand clutch at her heart, it had no strength to hold on. They could nev­er tru­ly touch again.

But he could whis­per, and his voice said, “Lyra, I nev­er thought I’d ev­er see you again, I thought even if you did come down here when you was dead, you’d be much old­er, you’d be a grownup, and you wouldn’t want to speak to me…

“Why ev­er not?”

“Be­cause I done the wrong thing when Pan got my dae­mon away from Lord As­riel’s! We should’ve run, we shouldn’t have tried to fight her! We should’ve run to you! Then she wouldn’t have been able to get my dae­mon again, and when the cliff fell away, my dae­mon would’ve still been with me!”

“But that weren’t your fault, stupid!” Lyra said. “It was me that brung you there in the first place, and I should’ve let you go back with the oth­er kids and the gyp­tians. It was my fault. I’m so sor­ry, Roger, hon­est, it was my fault, you wouldn’t've been here oth­er­wise…”

“Well,” he said, “I dun­no. Maybe I would’ve got dead some oth­er way. But it weren’t your fault, Lyra, see.”

She felt her­self be­gin­ning to be­lieve it; but all the same, it was heartrend­ing to see the poor lit­tle cold thing, so close and yet so out of reach. She tried to grasp his wrist, though her fin­gers closed in the emp­ty air; but he un­der­stood and sat down be­side her.

The oth­er ghosts with­drew a lit­tle, leav­ing them alone, and Will moved apart, too, to sit down and nurse his hand. It was bleed­ing again, and while Tialys flew fierce­ly at the ghosts to force them away, Salmakia helped Will tend to the wound.

But Lyra and Roger were obliv­ious to that.

“And you en’t dead,” he said. “How’d you come here if you’re still alive? And where’s Pan?”

“Oh, Roger, I had to leave him on the shore, it was the worst thing I ev­er had to do, it hurt so much, you know how it hurts, and he just stood there, just look­ing, oh, I felt like a mur­der­er, Roger, but I had to, or else I couldn’t have come!”

“I been pre­tend­ing to talk to you all the time since I died,” he said. “I been wish­ing I could, and wish­ing so hard…Just wish­ing I could get out, me and all the oth­er dead ‘uns, ’cause this is a ter­ri­ble place, Lyra, it’s hope­less, there’s no change when you’re dead, and them birdthings… You know what they do? They wait till you’re rest­ing, you can’t nev­er sleep prop­er­ly, you just sort of doze, and they come up qui­et be­side you and they whis­per all the bad things you ev­er did when you was alive, so you can’t for­get ‘em. They know all the worst things about you. They know how to make you feel hor­ri­ble, just think­ing of all the stupid things and bad things you ev­er did. And all the greedy and un­kind thoughts you ev­er had, they know ‘em all, and they shame you up and they make you feel sick with your­self… But you can’t get away from ‘em.”

“Well,” she said, “lis­ten.”

Drop­ping her voice and lean­ing clos­er to the lit­tle ghost, just as she used to do when they were plan­ning mis­chief at Jor­dan, : she went on:

“You prob­ably don’t know, but the witch­es, you re­mem­ber Ser­afi­na Pekkala, the witch­es’ve got a prophe­cy about me. They don’t know I know, no one does. I nev­er spoke to any­one about it be­fore. But when I was in Trolle­sund, and Farder Coram the gyp­tian took me to see the Witch­es’ Con­sul, Dr. Lanselius, he gave me like a kind of a test. He said I had to go out­side and pick out the right piece of cloud­pine out of all the oth­ers to show I could re­al­ly read the alethiome­ter.

“Well, I done that, and then I came in quick­ly, be­cause it was cold and it on­ly took a sec­ond, it was easy. The Con­sul was talk­ing to Farder Coram, and they didn’t know I could hear ‘em. He said the witch­es had this prophe­cy about me, I was go­ing to do some­thing great and im­por­tant, and it was go­ing to be in an­oth­er world…

“On­ly I nev­er spoke of it, and I reck­on I must have even for­got it, there was so much else go­ing on. So it sort of sunk out of my mind. I nev­er even talked about it with Pan, ’cause he would have laughed, I reck­on.

“But then lat­er on Mrs. Coul­ter caught me and I was in a trance, and I was dream­ing and I dreamed of that, and I dreamed of you. And I re­mem­bered the gyp­tian boat moth­er, Ma Cos­ta, you re­mem­ber, it was their boat we got on board of, in Jeri­cho, with Si­mon and Hugh and them…

“Yes! And we near­ly sailed it to Abing­don! That was the best thing we ev­er done, Lyra! I won’t nev­er for­get that, even if I’m down here dead for a thou­sand years…

“Yes, but lis­ten, when I ran away from Mrs. Coul­ter the first time, right, I found the gyp­tians again and they looked af­ter me and… Oh, Roger, there’s so much I found out, you’d be amazed, but this is the im­por­tant thing: Ma Cos­ta said to me, she said I’d got witchoil in my soul, she said the gyp­tians were wa­ter peo­ple but I was a fire per­son.

“And what I think that means is she was sort of prepar­ing me for the witch­prophe­cy. I know I got some­thing im­por­tant to do, and Dr. Lanselius the Con­sul said it was vi­tal I nev­er found out what my des­tiny was till it hap­pened, see, I must nev­er ask about it… So I nev­er did. I nev­er even thought what it might be. I nev­er asked the alethiome­ter, even.

“But now I think I know. And find­ing you again is just a sort of proof. What I got to do, Roger, what my des­tiny is, is I got to help all the ghosts out of the land of the dead for­ev­er. Me and Will, we got to res­cue you all. I’m sure it’s that. It must be. And be­cause Lord As­riel, be­cause of some­thing my fa­ther said… ‘Death is go­ing to die,’ he said. I dun­no what’ll hap­pen, though. You mustn’t tell ‘em yet, promise. I mean you might not last up there. But…

He was des­per­ate to speak, so she stopped.

“That’s just what I want­ed to tell you!” he said. “I told ‘em, all the oth­er dead ‘uns, I told them you’d come! Just like you came and res­cued the kids from Bolvan­gar! I says, Lyra’ll do it, it any­one can. They wished it’d be true, they want­ed to be­lieve me, but they nev­er re­al­ly did, I could tell.

“For one thing,” he went on, “ev­ery kid that’s ev­er come here, ev­ery sin­gle one, starts by say­ing, ‘I bet my dad’ll come and get me,’ or ‘I bet my mum, as soon as she knows where I am, she’ll fetch me home again. If it en’t their dad or mum, it’s their friends, or their grand­pa, but some­one’s go­ing to come and res­cue ‘em. On­ly they nev­er do. So no one be­lieved me when I told ‘em you’d come. On­ly I was right!”

“Yeah,” she said, “well, I couldn’t have done it with­out Will. That’s Will over there, and that’s the Che­va­li­er Tialys and the La­dy Salmakia. There’s so much to tell you, Roger…”

“Who’s Will? Where’s he come from?”

Lyra be­gan to ex­plain, quite un­aware of how her voice changed, how she sat up straighter, and how even her eyes looked dif­fer­ent when she told the sto­ry of her meet­ing with Will and the fight for the sub­tle knife. How could she have known? But Roger no­ticed, with the sad, voice­less en­vy of the un­chang­ing dead.

Mean­while, Will and the Gal­livespi­ans were a lit­tle way off, talk­ing qui­et­ly.

“What are you go­ing to do, you and the girl?” said Tialys.

“Open this world and let the ghosts out. That’s what I’ve got the knife for.”

He had nev­er seen such as­ton­ish­ment on any faces, let alone those of peo­ple whose good opin­ion he val­ued. He’d ac­quired a great re­spect for these two. They sat silent for a few mo­ments, and then Tialys said:

“This will un­do ev­ery­thing. It’s the great­est blow you could strike. The Au­thor­ity will be pow­er­less af­ter this.”

“How would they ev­er sus­pect it?” said the La­dy. “It’ll come at them out of nowhere!”

“And what then?” Tialys asked Will.

“What then? Well, then we’ll have to get out our­selves, and find our dae­mons, I sup­pose. Don’t think of then. It’s enough to think of now. I haven’t said any­thing to the ghosts, in case…, in case it doesn’t work. So don’t you say any­thing, ei­ther. Now I’m go­ing to find a world I can open, and those harpies are watch­ing. So if you want to help, you can go and dis­tract them while I do that.”

In­stant­ly the Gal­livespi­ans urged their drag­on­flies up in­to the murk over­head, where the harpies were as thick as blowflies. Will watched the great in­sects charg­ing fear­less­ly up at them, for all the world as if the harpies were flies and they could snap them up in their jaws, big as they were. He thought how much the bril­liant crea­tures would love it when the sky was open and they could skim about over bright wa­ter again.

Then he took up the knife. And in­stant­ly there came back the words the harpies had thrown at him, taunts about his moth­er, and he stopped. He put the knife down, try­ing to clear his mind.

He tried again, with the same re­sult. He could hear them clam­or­ing above, de­spite the fe­roc­ity of the Gal­livespi­ans; there were so many of them that two fliers alone could do lit­tle to stop them.

Well, this was what it was go­ing to be like. It wasn’t go­ing to get any eas­ier. So Will let his mind re­lax and be­come dis­en­gaged, and just sat there with the knife held loose­ly un­til he was ready again.

This time the knife cut straight in­to the air, and met rock. He had opened a win­dow in this world in­to the un­der­ground of an­oth­er. He closed it up and tried again.

And the same thing hap­pened, though he knew it was a dif­fer­ent world. He’d opened win­dows be­fore to find him­self above the ground of an­oth­er world, so he shouldn’t have been sur­prised to find he was un­der­ground for a change, but it was dis­con­cert­ing.

Next time he felt care­ful­ly in the way he’d learned, let­ting the tip search for the res­onance that re­vealed a world where the ground was in the same place. But the touch was wrong wher­ev­er he felt. There was no world any­where he could open in­to; ev­ery­where he touched, it was sol­id rock.

Lyra had sensed that some­thing was wrong, and she jumped up from her close con­ver­sa­tion with Roger’s ghost to hur­ry to Will’s side.

“What is it?” she said qui­et­ly.

He told her, and added, “We’re go­ing to have to move some­where else be­fore I can find a world we can open in­to. And those harpies aren’t go­ing to let us. Have you told the ghosts what we were plan­ning?”

“No. On­ly Roger, and I told him to keep it qui­et. He’ll do what­ev­er I tell him. Oh, Will, I’m scared, I’m so scared. We might not ev­er get out. Sup­pose we get stuck here for­ev­er?”

“The knife can cut through rock. If we need to, we’ll just cut a tun­nel. It’ll take a long time, and I hope we won’t have to, but we could. Don’t wor­ry.”

“Yeah. You’re right. Course we could.”

But she thought he looked so ill, with his face drawn in pain and with dark rings around his eyes, and his hand was shak­ing, and his fin­gers were bleed­ing again; he looked as sick as she felt. They couldn’t go on much longer with­out their dae­mons. She felt her own ghost quail in her body, and hugged her arms tight­ly, aching for Pan.

Mean­while, the ghosts were press­ing close, poor things, and the chil­dren es­pe­cial­ly couldn’t leave Lyra alone.

“Please,” said one girl, “you won’t for­get us when you go back, will you?”

“No,” said Lyra, “nev­er.”

“You’ll tell them about us?”

“I promise. What’s your name?”

But the poor girl was em­bar­rassed and ashamed: she’d for­got­ten. She turned away, hid­ing her face, and a boy said:

“It’s bet­ter to for­get, I reck­on. I’ve for­got­ten mine. Some en’t been here long, and they still know who they are. There’s some kids been here thou­sands of years. They’re no old­er than us, and they’ve for­got­ten a whole lot. Ex­cept the sun­shine. No one for­gets that. And the wind.”

“Yeah,” said an­oth­er, “tell us about that!”

And more and more of them clam­ored for Lyra to tell them about the things they re­mem­bered, the sun and the wind and the sky, and the things they’d for­got­ten, such as how to play; and she turned to Will and whis­pered, “What should I do, Will?”

“Tell them.”

“I’m scared. Af­ter what hap­pened back there, the harpies…

“Tell them the truth. We’ll keep the harpies off.”

She looked at him doubt­ful­ly. In fact, she felt sick with ap­pre­hen­sion. She turned back to the ghosts, who were throng­ing clos­er and clos­er.

“Please!” they were whis­per­ing. “You’ve just come from the world! Tell us, tell us! Tell us about the world!”

There was a tree not far away, just a dead trunk with its bone white branch­es thrust­ing in­to the chilly gray air, and be­cause Lyra was feel­ing weak, and be­cause she didn’t think she could walk and talk at the same time, she made for that so as to have some­where to sit. The crowd of ghosts jos­tled and shuf­fled aside to make room.

When she and Will were near­ly at the tree, Tialys land­ed on Will’s hand and in­di­cat­ed that he should bend his head to lis­ten.

“They’re com­ing back,” he said qui­et­ly, “those harpies. More and more of them. Have your knife ready. The La­dy and I will hold them off as long as we can, hut you might need to fight.”

With­out wor­ry­ing Lyra, Will loos­ened the knife in its sheath and kept his hand close to it. Tialys took off again, and then Lyra reached the tree and sat down on one of the thick roots.

So many dead fig­ures clus­tered around, press­ing hope­ful­ly, wideeyed, that Will had to make them keep back and leave room; but he let Roger stay close, be­cause he was gaz­ing at Lyra, lis­ten­ing with a pas­sion.

And Lyra be­gan to talk about the world she knew.

She told them the sto­ry of how she and Roger had climbed over Jor­dan Col­lege roof and found the rook with the bro­ken leg, and how they had looked af­ter it un­til it was ready to fly again; and how they had ex­plored the wine cel­lars, all thick with dust and cob­webs, and drunk some ca­nary, or it might have been Tokay, she couldn’t tell, and how drunk they had been. And Roger’s ghost lis­tened, proud and des­per­ate, nod­ding and whis­per­ing, “Yes, yes! That’s just what hap­pened, that’s true all right!”

Then she told them all about the great bat­tle be­tween the Ox­ford town­ies and the clay­burn­ers.

First she de­scribed the claybeds, mak­ing sure she got in ev­ery­thing she could re­mem­ber, the wide ocher­col­ored wash­ing pits, the dragline, the kilns like great brick bee­hives. She told them about the wil­low trees along the riv­er’s edge, with their leaves all sil­very un­der­neath; and she told how when the sun shone for more than a cou­ple of days, the clay be­gan to split up in­to great hand­some plates, with deep cracks be­tween, and how it felt to squish your fin­gers in­to the cracks and slow­ly lever up a dried plate of mud, try­ing to keep it as big as you could with­out break­ing it. Un­der­neath it was still wet, ide­al for throw­ing at peo­ple.

And she de­scribed the smells around the place, the smoke from the kilns, the rot­ten­leaf­mold smell of the riv­er when the wind was in the south­west, the warm smell of the bak­ing pota­toes the clay­burn­ers used to eat; and the sound of the wa­ter slip­ping slick­ly over the sluices and in­to the wash­ing pits; and the slow, thick suck as you tried to pull your foot out of the ground; and the heavy, wet slap of the gate pad­dles in the claythick wa­ter.

As she spoke, play­ing on all their sens­es, the ghosts crowd­ed clos­er, feed­ing on her words, re­mem­ber­ing the time when they had flesh and skin and nerves and sens­es, and will­ing her nev­er to stop.

Then she told how the clay­burn­ers’ chil­dren al­ways made war on the town­ies, but how they were slow and dull, with clay in their brains, and how the town­ies were as sharp and quick as spar­rows by con­trast; and how one day all the town­ies had sw­al­lowed their dif­fer­ences and plot­ted and planned and at­tacked the claybeds from three sides, pin­ning the clay­burn­ers’ chil­dren back against the riv­er, hurl­ing hand­fuls and hand­fuls of heavy, clag­gy clay at one an­oth­er, rush­ing their mud­dy cas­tle and tear­ing it down, turn­ing the for­ti­fi­ca­tions in­to mis­siles un­til the air and the ground and the wa­ter were all mixed in­ex­tri­ca­bly to­geth­er, and ev­ery child looked ex­act­ly the same, mud from scalp to sole, and none of them had had a bet­ter day in all their lives.

When she’d fin­ished, she looked at Will, ex­haust­ed. Then she had a shock.

As well as the ghosts, silent all around, and her com­pan­ions, close and liv­ing, there was an­oth­er au­di­ence, too: the branch­es of the tree were clus­tered with those dark bird forms, their wom­en’s faces gaz­ing down at her, solemn and spell­bound.

She stood up in sud­den fear, but they didn’t move.

“You,” she said, des­per­ate, “you flew at me be­fore, when I tried to tell you some­thing. What’s stop­ping you now? Go on, tear at me with your claws and make a ghost out of me!”

“That is the least we shall do,” said the harpy in the cen­ter, who was NoN­ame her­self. “Lis­ten to me. Thou­sands of years ago, when the first ghosts came down here, the Au­thor­ity gave us the pow­er to see the worst in ev­ery one, and we have fed on the worst ev­er since, till our blood is rank with it and our very hearts are sick­ened.

“But still, it was all we had to feed on. It was all we had. And now we learn that you are plan­ning to open a way to the up­per world and lead all the ghosts out in­to the air…

And her harsh voice was drowned by a mil­li­on whis­pers, as ev­ery ghost who could hear cried out in joy and hope; but all the harpies screamed and beat their wings un­til the ghosts fell silent again.

“Yes,” cried NoN­ame, “to lead them out! What will we do now? I shall tell you what we will do: from now on, we shall hold noth­ing back. We shall hurt and de­file and tear and rend ev­ery ghost that comes through, and we shall send them mad with fear and re­morse and self­ha­tred. This is a waste­land now; we shall make it a hell!”

Ev­ery sin­gle harpy shrieked and jeered, and many of them flew up off the tree and straight at the ghosts, mak­ing them scat­ter in ter­ror. Lyra clung to Will’s arm and said, “They’ve giv­en it away now, and we can’t do it. They’ll hate us, they’ll think we be­trayed them! We’ve made it worse, not bet­ter!”

“Qui­et,” said Tialys. “Don’t de­spair. Call the harpies back and make them lis­ten to us.”

So Will cried out, “Come back! Come back, ev­ery one of you! Come back and lis­ten!”

One by one the harpies, their faces ea­ger and hun­gry and suf­fused with the lust for mis­ery, turned and flew back to the tree, and the ghosts drift­ed back as well. The Che­va­li­er left his drag­on­fly in the care of Salmakia, and his lit­tle tense fig­ure, green­clad and dark­haired, leapt to a rock where they could all see him.

“Harpies,” he said, “we can of­fer you some­thing bet­ter than that. An­swer my ques­tions tru­ly, and hear what I say, and then judge. When Lyra spoke to you out­side the wall, you flew at her. Why did you do that?”

“Lies!” the harpies all cried. “Lies and fan­tasies!”

“Yet when she spoke just now, you all lis­tened, ev­ery one of you, and you kept silent and still. Again, why was that?”

“Be­cause it was true,” said NoN­ame. “Be­cause she spoke the truth. Be­cause it was nour­ish­ing. Be­cause it was feed­ing us. Be­cause we couldn’t help it. Be­cause it was true. Be­cause we had no idea that there was any­thing but wicked­ness. Be­cause it brought us news of the world and the sun and the wind and the rain. Be­cause it was true.”

“Then,” said Tialys, “let’s make a bar­gain with you. In­stead of see­ing on­ly the wicked­ness and cru­el­ty and greed of the ghosts that come down here, from now on you will have the right to ask all the ghosts to tell you the sto­ries of their lives, and they will have to tell the truth about what they’ve seen and touched and heard and loved and known in the world. Ev­ery one of these ghosts has a sto­ry; ev­ery sin­gle one that comes down in the fu­ture will have true things to tell you about the world. And you’ll have the right to hear them, and they will have to tell you.”

Lyra mar­veled at the nerve of the lit­tle spy. How did he dare speak to these crea­tures as if he had the pow­er to give them rights? Any one of them could have snapped him up in a mo­ment, wrenched him apart in her claws or car­ried him high and then hurled him down to the ground to smash in pieces. And yet there he stood, proud and fear­less, mak­ing a bar­gain with them! And they lis­tened, and con­ferred, their faces turn­ing to one an­oth­er, their voic­es low.

All the ghosts watched, fear­ful and silent.

Then NoN­ame turned back.

“That’s not enough,” she said. “We want more than that. We had a task un­der the old dis­pen­sa­tion. We had a place and a du­ty. We ful­filled the Au­thor­ity’s com­mands dili­gent­ly, and for that we were hon­ored. Hat­ed and feared, hut hon­ored, too. What will hap­pen to our hon­or now? Why should the ghosts take any no­tice of us, if they can sim­ply walk out in­to the world again? We have our pride, and you should not let that be dis­pensed with. We need an hon­or­able place! We need a du­ty and a task to do, one that will bring us the re­spect we de­serve!”

They shift­ed on the branch­es, mut­ter­ing and rais­ing their wings. But a mo­ment lat­er Salmakia leapt up to join the Che­va­li­er, and called out:

“You are quite right. Ev­ery­one should have a task to do that’s im­por­tant, one that brings them hon­or, one they can per­form with pride. So here is your task, and it’s one that on­ly you can do, be­cause you are the guardians and the keep­ers of this place. Your task will be to guide the ghosts from the land­ing place by the lake all the way through the land of the dead to the new open­ing out in­to the world. In ex­change, they will tell you their sto­ries as a fair and just pay­ment for this guid­an­ce. Does that seem right to you?”

NoN­ame looked at her sis­ters, and they nod­ded. She said: “And we have the right to refuse to guide them if they lie, or if they hold any­thing back, or if they have noth­ing to tell us. If they live in the world, they should see and touch and hear and learn things. We shall make an ex­cep­tion for in­fants who have not had time to learn any­thing, but oth­er­wise, if they come down here bring­ing noth­ing, we shall not guide them out.”

“That is fair,” said Salmakia, and the oth­er trav­el­ers agreed.

So they made a treaty. And in ex­change for the sto­ry of Lyra’s that they’d al­ready heard, the harpies of­fered to take the trav­el­ers and their knife to a part of the land of the dead where the up­per world was close. It was a long way off, through tun­nels and caves, hut they would guide them faith­ful­ly, and all the ghosts could fol­low.

But be­fore they could be­gin, a voice cried out, as loud­ly as a whis­per could cry. It was the ghost of a thin man with an an­gry, pas­sion­ate face, and he cried:

“What will hap­pen? When we leave the world of the dead, will we live again? Or will we van­ish as our dae­mons did? Broth­ers, sis­ters, we shouldn’t fol­low this child any­where till we know what’s go­ing to hap­pen to us!”

Oth­ers took up the ques­tion: “Yes, tell us where we’re go­ing! Tell us what to ex­pect! We won’t go un­less we know what’ll hap­pen to us!”

Lyra turned to Will in de­spair, but he said, “Tell them the truth. Ask the alethiome­ter, and tell them what it says.”

“All right,” she said.

She took out the gold­en in­stru­ment. The an­swer came at once. She put it away and stood up.

“This is what’ll hap­pen,” she said, “and it’s true, per­fect­ly true. When you go out of here, all the par­ti­cles that make you up will loosen and float apart, just like your dae­mons did. If you’ve seen peo­ple dy­ing, you know what that looks like. But your dae­mons en’t just noth­ing now; they’re part of ev­ery­thing. All the atoms that were them, they’ve gone in­to the air and the wind and the trees and the earth and all the liv­ing things. They’ll nev­er van­ish. They’re just part of ev­ery­thing. And that’s ex­act­ly what’ll hap­pen to you, I swear to you, I promise on my hon­or. You’ll drift apart, it’s true, but you’ll be out in the open, part of ev­ery­thing alive again.”

No one spoke. Those who had seen how dae­mons dis­solved were re­mem­ber­ing it, and those who hadn’t were imag­in­ing it, and no one spoke un­til a young wom­an came for­ward. She had died as a mar­tyr cen­turies be­fore. She looked around and said to the oth­er ghosts:

“When we were alive, they told us that when we died we’d go to Heav­en. And they said that Heav­en was a place of joy and glo­ry and we would spend eter­ni­ty in the com­pa­ny of saints and an­gels prais­ing the Almighty, in a state of bliss. That’s what they said. And that’s what led some of us to give our lives, and oth­ers to spend years in soli­tary prayer, while all the joy of life was go­ing to waste around us and we nev­er knew.

“Be­cause the land of the dead isn’t a place of re­ward or a place of pun­ish­ment. It’s a place of noth­ing. The good come here as well as the wicked, and all of us lan­guish in this gloom for­ev­er, with no hope of free­dom, or joy, or sleep, or rest, or peace.

“But now this child has come of­fer­ing us a way out and I’m go­ing to fol­low her. Even if it means obliv­ion, friends, I’ll wel­come it, be­cause it won’t be noth­ing. We’ll be alive again in a thou­sand blades of grass, and a mil­li­on leaves; we’ll be falling in the rain­drops and blow­ing in the fresh breeze; we’ll be glit­ter­ing in the dew un­der the stars and the moon out there in the phys­ical world, which is our true home and al­ways was.

“So I urge you: come with the child out to the sky!”

But her ghost was thrust aside by the ghost of a man who looked like a monk: thin and pale, with dark, zeal­ous eyes even in his death. He crossed him­self and mur­mured a prayer, and then he said:

“This is a bit­ter mes­sage, a sad and cru­el joke. Can’t you see the truth? This is not a child. This is an agent of the Evil One him­self! The world we lived in was a vale of cor­rup­tion and tears. Noth­ing there could sat­is­fy us. But the Almighty has grant­ed us this blessed place for all eter­ni­ty, this par­adise, which to the fall­en soul seems bleak and bar­ren, but which the eyes of faith see as it is, over­flow­ing with milk and hon­ey and re­sound­ing with the sweet hymns of the an­gels. This is Heav­en, tru­ly! What this evil girl promis­es is noth­ing but lies. She wants to lead you to Hell! Go with her at your per­il. My com­pan­ions and I of the true faith will re­main here in our blessed par­adise, and spend eter­ni­ty singing the prais­es of the Almighty, who has giv­en us the judg­ment to tell the false from the true.”

Once again he crossed him­self, and then he and his com­pan­ions turned away in hor­ror and loathing.

Lyra felt be­wil­dered. Was she wrong? Was she mak­ing some great mis­take? She looked around: gloom and des­ola­tion on ev­ery side. But she’d been wrong be­fore about the ap­pear­an­ce of things, trust­ing Mrs. Coul­ter be­cause of her beau­ti­ful smile and her sweets­cent­ed glam­our. It was so easy to get things wrong; and with­out her dae­mon to guide her, maybe she was wrong about this, too.

But Will was shak­ing her arm. Then he put his hands to her face and held it rough­ly.

“You know that’s not true,” he said, “just as well as you can feel this. Take no no­tice! They can all see he’s ly­ing, too. And they’re de­pend­ing on us. Come on, let’s make a start.”

She nod­ded. She had to trust her body and the truth of what her sens­es told her; she knew Pan would have.

So they set off, and the num­ber­less mil­li­ons of ghosts be­gan to fol­low them. Be­hind them, too far back for the chil­dren to see, oth­er in­hab­itants of the world of the dead had heard what was hap­pen­ing and were com­ing to join the great march. Tialys and Salmakia flew back to look and were over­joyed to see their own peo­ple there, and ev­ery oth­er kind of con­scious be­ing who had ev­er been pun­ished by the Au­thor­ity with ex­ile and death. Among them were be­in­gs who didn’t look hu­man at all, be­in­gs like the mule­fa, whom Mary Mal­one would have rec­og­nized, and stranger ghosts as well.

But Will and Lyra had no strength to look back; all they could do was move on af­ter the harpies, and hope.

“Have we al­most done it, Will?” Lyra whis­pered. “Is it near­ly over?”

He couldn’t tell. But they were so weak and sick that he said, “Yes, it’s near­ly over, we’ve near­ly done it. We’ll be out soon.”





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-FOUR - MRS. COULTER IN GENEVA


Mrs. Coul­ter wait­ed till night­fall be­fore she ap­proached the Col­lege of St. Jerome. Af­ter dark­ness had fall­en, she brought the in­ten­tion craft down through the cloud and moved slow­ly along the lakeshore at tree­top height. The Col­lege was a dis­tinc­tive shape among the oth­er an­cient build­in­gs of Gene­va, and she soon found the spire, the dark hol­low of the clois­ters, the square tow­er where the Pres­ident of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline had his lodg­ing. She had vis­it­ed the Col­lege three times be­fore; she knew that the ridges and gables and chim­neys of the roof con­cealed plen­ty of hid­ing places, even for some­thing as large as the in­ten­tion craft.

Fly­ing slow­ly above the tiles, which glis­tened with the re­cent rain, she edged the ma­chine in­to a lit­tle gul­ly be­tween a steep tiled roof and the sheer wall of the tow­er. The place was on­ly vis­ible from the bel­fry of the Chapel of the Holy Pen­itence near­by; it would do very well.

She low­ered the air­craft del­icate­ly on­to the roof, let­ting its six feet find their own pur­chase and ad­just them­selves to keep the cab­in lev­el. She was be­gin­ning to love this ma­chine: it sprang to her bid­ding as fast as she could think, and it was so silent; it could hov­er above peo­ple’s heads close­ly enough for them to touch, and they’d nev­er know it was there. In the day or so since she’d stolen it, Mrs. Coul­ter had mas­tered the con­trols, but she still had no idea how it was pow­ered, and that was the on­ly thing she wor­ried about: she had no way of telling when the fu­el or the bat­ter­ies would run out.

Once she was sure it had set­tled, and that the roof was sol­id enough to sup­port it, she took off the hel­met and climbed down.

Her dae­mon was al­ready priz­ing up one of the heavy old tiles. She joined him, and soon they had lift­ed half a dozen out of the way, and then she snapped off the bat­tens on which they’d been hung, mak­ing a gap big enough to get through.

“Go in and look around,” she whis­pered, and the dae­mon dropped through in­to the dark.

She could hear his claws as he moved care­ful­ly over the floor of the at­tic, and then his gold­fringed black face ap­peared in the open­ing. She un­der­stood at once and fol­lowed him through, wait­ing to let her eyes ad­just. In the dim light she grad­ual­ly saw a long at­tic where the dark shapes of cup­boards, ta­bles, book­cas­es, and fur­ni­ture of all kinds had been put in­to stor­age.

The first thing she did was to push a tall cup­board in front of the gap where the tiles had been. Then she tip­toed to the door in the wall at the far end and tried the han­dle. It was locked, of course, but she had a hair­pin, and the lock was sim­ple. Three min­utes lat­er she and her dae­mon were stand­ing at one end of a long cor­ri­dor, where a dusty sky­light let them see a nar­row stair­case de­scend­ing at the oth­er.

And five min­utes af­ter that, they had opened a win­dow in the pantry next to the kitchen two floors be­low and climbed out in­to the al­ley. The gate­house of the Col­lege was just around the cor­ner, and as she said to the gold­en mon­key, it was im­por­tant to ar­rive in the or­tho­dox way, no mat­ter how they in­tend­ed to leave.

“Take your hands off me,” she said calm­ly to the guard, “and show me some cour­tesy, or I shall have you flayed. Tell the Pres­ident that Mrs. Coul­ter has ar­rived and that she wish­es to see him at once.”

The man fell back, and his pin­sch­er dae­mon, who had been bar­ing her teeth at the mild­man­nered gold­en mon­key, in­stant­ly cow­ered and tucked her tail stump as low as it would go.

The guard cranked the han­dle of a tele­phone, and un­der a minute lat­er a fresh­faced young priest came has­ten­ing in­to the gate­house, wip­ing his palms on his robe in case she want­ed to shake hands. She didn’t.

“Who are you?” she said.

“Broth­er Louis,” said the man, sooth­ing his rab­bit dae­mon, “Con­ven­er of the Sec­re­tari­at of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court. If you would be so kind…

“I haven’t come here to par­ley with a scriv­en­er,” she told him. “Take me to Fa­ther MacPhail. And do it now.”

The man bowed help­less­ly and led her away. The guard be’ hind her blew out his cheeks with re­lief.

Broth­er Louis, af­ter try­ing two or three times to make con­ver­sa­tion, gave up and led her in si­lence to the Pres­ident’s rooms in the tow­er. Fa­ther MacPhail was at his de­vo­tions, and poor Broth­er Louis’s hand shook vi­olent­ly as he knocked. They heard a sigh and a groan, and then heavy foot­steps crossed the floor.

The Pres­ident’s eyes widened as he saw who it was, and he smiled wolfish­ly.

“Mrs. Coul­ter,” he said, of­fer­ing his hand. “I am very glad to see you. My study is cold, and our hos­pi­tal­ity is plain, but come in, come in.”

“Good evening,” she said, fol­low­ing him in­side the bleak stonewalled room, al­low­ing him to make a lit­tle fuss and show her to a chair. “Thank you,” she said to Broth­er Louis, who was still hov­er­ing, “I’ll take a glass of choco­late.”

Noth­ing had been of­fered, and she knew how in­sult­ing it was to treat him like a ser­vant, but his man­ner was so ab­ject that he de­served it. The Pres­ident nod­ded, and Broth­er Louis had to leave and deal with it, to his great an­noy­an­ce.

“Of course you are un­der ar­rest,” said the Pres­ident, tak­ing the oth­er chair and turn­ing up the lamp.

“Oh, why spoil our talk be­fore we’ve even be­gun?” said Mrs. Coul­ter. “I came here vol­un­tar­ily, as soon as I could es­cape from As­riel’s fortress. The fact is, Fa­ther Pres­ident, I have a great deal of in­for­ma­tion about his forces, and about the child, and I came here to give it to you.”

“The child, then. Be­gin with the child.”

“My daugh­ter is now twelve years old. Very soon she will ap­proach the cusp of ado­les­cence, and then it will be too late for any of us to pre­vent the catas­tro­phe; na­ture and op­por­tu­ni­ty will come to­geth­er like spark and tin­der. Thanks to your in­ter­ven­tion, that is now far more like­ly. I hope you’re sat­is­fied.”

“It was your du­ty to bring her here in­to our care. In­stead, you chose to skulk in a moun­tain cave, though how a wom­an of your in­tel­li­gence hoped to re­main hid­den is a mys­tery to me.”

“There’s prob­ably a great deal that’s mys­te­ri­ous to you, my Lord Pres­ident, start­ing with the re­la­tions be­tween a moth­er and her child. If you thought for one mo­ment that I would re­lease my daugh­ter in­to the care, the care! , of a body of men with a fever­ish ob­ses­sion with sex­ual­ity, men with dirty fin­ger­nails, reek­ing of an­cient sweat, men whose furtive imag­ina­tions would crawl over her body like cock­roach­es, if you thought I would ex­pose my child to that, my Lord Pres­ident, you are more stupid than you take me for.”

There was a knock on the door be­fore he could re­ply, and Broth­er Louis came in with two glass­es of choco­late on a wood­en tray. He laid the tray on the ta­ble with a ner­vous bow, smil­ing at the Pres­ident in hopes of be­ing asked to stay; but Fa­ther MacPhail nod­ded to­ward the door, and the young man left re­luc­tant­ly.

“So what were you go­ing to do?” said the Pres­ident.

“I was go­ing to keep her safe un­til the dan­ger had passed.”

“What dan­ger would that he?” he said, hand­ing her a glass.

“Oh, I think you know what I mean. Some­where there is a tempter, a ser­pent, so to speak, and I had to keep them from meet­ing.”

“There is a boy with her.”

“Yes. And if you hadn’t in­ter­fered, they would both be un­der my con­trol. As it is, they could be any­where. At least they’re not with Lord As­riel.”

“I have no doubt he will be look­ing for them. The boy has a knife of ex­traor­di­nary pow­er. They would be worth pur­su­ing for that alone.”

“I’m aware of that,” said Mrs. Coul­ter. “I man­aged to break ? it, and he man­aged to get it mend­ed again.”

The Pres­ident won­dered why she was smil­ing. Sure­ly she didn’t ap­prove of this wretched boy?

“We know,” he said short­ly.

“Well, well,” she said. “Fra Pavel must be get­ting quick­er. When I knew him, it would have tak­en him a month at least to read all that.”

She sipped her choco­late, which was thin and weak; how like these wretched priests, she thought, to take their sel­frigh­teous ab­sti­nence out on their vis­itors, too.

“Tell me about Lord As­riel,” said the Pres­ident. “Tell me ev­ery­thing.”

Mrs. Coul­ter set­tled back com­fort­ably and be­gan to tell him, not ev­ery­thing, but he nev­er thought for a mo­ment that she would. She told him about the fortress, about the al­lies, about the an­gels, about the mines and the foundries.

Fa­ther MacPhail sat with­out mov­ing a mus­cle, his lizard dae­mon ab­sorb­ing and re­mem­ber­ing ev­ery word.

“And how did you get here?” he asked.

“I stole a gy­ropter. It ran out of fu­el and I had to aban­don it in the coun­try­side not far from here. The rest of the way I walked.”

“Is Lord As­riel ac­tive­ly search­ing for the girl and the boy?”

“Of course.”

“I as­sume he’s af­ter that knife. You know it has a name? The clif­fghasts of the north call it the godde­stroy­er,” he went on, cross­ing to the win­dow and look­ing down over the clois­ters. “That’s what As­riel is aim­ing to do, isn’t it? De­stroy the Au­thor­ity? There are some peo­ple who claim that God is dead al­ready. Pre­sum­ably, As­riel is not one of those, if he re­tains the am­bi­tion to kill him.”

“Well, where is God,” said Mrs. Coul­ter, “if he’s alive? And why doesn’t he speak any­more? At the be­gin­ning of the world, God walked in the Gar­den and spoke with Adam and Eve. Then he be­gan to with­draw, and he for­bade Moses to look at his face. Lat­er, in the time of Daniel, he was aged, he was the An­cient of Days. Where is he now? Is he still alive, at some in­con­ceiv­able age, de­crepit and de­ment­ed, un­able to think or act or speak and un­able to die, a rot­ten hulk? And if that is his con­di­tion, wouldn’t it be the most mer­ci­ful thing, the truest proof of our love for God, to seek him out and give him the gift of death?”

Mrs. Coul­ter felt a calm ex­hil­ara­tion as she spoke. She won­dered if she’d ev­er get out alive; but it was in­tox­icat­ing, to speak like that to this man.

“And Dust?” he said. “From the depths of heresy, what is your view of Dust?”

“I have no view of Dust,” she said. “I don’t know what it is. No one does.”

“I see. Well, I be­gan by re­mind­ing you that you are un­der ar­rest. I think it’s time we found you some­where to sleep. You’ll be quite com­fort­able; no one will hurt you; but you’re not go­ing to get away. And we shall talk more to­mor­row.”

He rang a bell, and Broth­er Louis came in al­most at once. “Show Mrs. Coul­ter to the best guest room,” said the Pres­ident. “And lock her in.”

The best guest room was shab­by and the fur­ni­ture was cheap, but at least it was clean. Af­ter the lock had turned be­hind her, Mrs. Coul­ter looked around at once for the mi­cro­phone and found one in the elab­orate light­fit­ting and an­oth­er un­der the frame of the bed. She dis­con­nect­ed them both, and then had a hor­ri­ble sur­prise.

Watch­ing her from the top of the chest of draw­ers be­hind the door was Lord Roke.

She cried out and put a hand on the wall to steady her­self. The Gal­livespi­an was sit­ting cross­legged, en­tire­ly at his ease, and nei­ther she nor the gold­en mon­key had seen him. Once the pound­ing of her heart had sub­sid­ed, and her breath­ing had slowed, she said, “And when would you have done me the cour­tesy of let­ting me know you were here, my lord? Be­fore I un­dressed, or af­ter­wards?”

“Be­fore,” he said. “Tell your dae­mon to calm down, or I’ll dis­able him.”

The gold­en mon­key’s teeth were bared, and all his fur was stand­ing on end. The scorch­ing mal­ice of his ex­pres­sion was enough to make any nor­mal per­son quail, but Lord Roke mere­ly smiled. His spurs glit­tered in the dim light.

The lit­tle spy stood up and stretched.

“I’ve just spo­ken to my agent in Lord As­riel’s fortress,” he went on. “Lord As­riel presents his com­pli­ments and asks you to let him know as soon as you find out what these peo­ple’s in­ten­tions are.”

She felt wind­ed, as if Lord As­riel had thrown her hard in wrestling. Her eyes widened, and she sat down slow­ly on the bed.

“Did you come here to spy on me, or to help?” she said.

“Both, and it’s lucky for you I’m here. As soon as you ar­rived, they set some an­bar­ic work in mo­tion down in the cel­lars. I don’t know what it is, but there’s a team of sci­en­tists work­ing on it right now. You seem to have gal­va­nized them.”

“I don’t know whether to be flat­tered or alarmed. As a mat­ter of fact, I’m ex­haust­ed, and I’m go­ing to sleep. If you’re here to help me, you can keep watch. You can be­gin by look­ing the oth­er way.”

He bowed and faced the wall un­til she had washed in the chipped basin, dried her­self on the thin tow­el, and un­dressed and got in­to bed. Her dae­mon pa­trolled the room, check­ing the wardrobe, the pic­ture rail, the cur­tains, the view of the dark clois­ters out of the win­dow. Lord Roke watched him ev­ery inch of the way. Fi­nal­ly the gold­en mon­key joined Mrs. Coul­ter, and they fell asleep at once.

Lord Roke hadn’t told her ev­ery­thing that he’d learned from Lord As­riel. The al­lies had been track­ing the flight of all kinds of be­in­gs in the air above the fron­tiers of the Re­pub­lic, and had no­ticed a con­cen­tra­tion of what might have been an­gels, and might have been some­thing else en­tire­ly, in the west. They had sent pa­trols out to in­ves­ti­gate, but so far they had learned noth­ing: what­ev­er it was that hung there had wrapped it­self in im­pen­etra­ble fog.

The spy thought it best not to trou­ble Mrs. Coul­ter with that, though; she was ex­haust­ed. Let her sleep, he de­cid­ed, and he moved silent­ly about the room, lis­ten­ing at the door, watch­ing out of the win­dow, awake and alert.

An hour af­ter she had first come in­to the room, he heard a qui­et noise out­side the door: a faint scratch and a whis­per. At the same mo­ment a dim light out­lined the door. Lord Roke moved to the far­thest cor­ner and stood be­hind one of the legs of the chair on which Mrs. Coul­ter had thrown her clothes.

A minute went by, and then the key turned very qui­et­ly in the lock. The door opened an inch, no more, and then the light went out.

Lord Roke could see well enough in the dim glow through the thin cur­tains, but the in­trud­er was hav­ing to wait for his eyes to ad­just. Fi­nal­ly the door opened far­ther, very slow­ly, and the young priest Broth­er Louis stepped in.

He crossed him­self and tip­toed to the bed. Lord Roke pre­pared to spring, but the priest mere­ly lis­tened to Mrs. Coul­ter’s steady breath­ing, looked close­ly to see whether she was asleep, and then turned to the bed­side ta­ble.

He cov­ered the bulb of the bat­tery light with his hand and switched it on, let­ting a thin gleam es­cape through his fin­gers. He peered at the ta­ble so close­ly that his nose near­ly touched ‘ the sur­face, but what­ev­er he was look­ing for, he didn’t find it. Mrs. Coul­ter had put a few things there be­fore she got in­to bed, a cou­ple of coins, a ring, her watch, but Broth­er Louis wasn’t in­ter­est­ed in those.

He turned to her again, and then he saw what he was look­ing for, ut­ter­ing a soft hiss be­tween his teeth. Lord Roke could see his dis­may: the ob­ject of his search was the lock­et on the gold chain around Mrs. Coul­ter’s neck.

Lord Roke moved silent­ly along the skirt­ing board to­ward the door.

The priest crossed him­self again, for he was go­ing to have to touch her. Hold­ing his breath, he bent over the bed, and the gold­en mon­key stirred.

The young man froze, hands out­stretched. His rab­bit dae­mon trem­bled at his feet, no use at all: she could at least have kept watch for the poor man, Lord Roke thought. The mon­key turned over in his sleep and fell still again.

Af­ter a minute poised like a wax­work, Broth­er Louis low­ered his shak­ing hands to Mrs. Coul­ter’s neck. He fum­bled for so long that Lord Roke thought the dawn would break be­fore he got the catch un­done, but fi­nal­ly he lift­ed the lock­et gen­tly away and stood up.

Lord Roke, as quick and as qui­et as a mouse, was out of the door be­fore the priest had turned around. He wait­ed in the dark cor­ri­dor, and when the young man tip­toed out and turned the key, the Gal­livespi­an be­gan to fol­low him.

Broth­er Louis made for the tow­er, and when the Pres­ident opened his door, Lord Roke dart­ed through and made for the priedieu in the cor­ner of the room. There he found a shad­owy ledge where he crouched and lis­tened.

Fa­ther MacPhail was not alone: Fra Pavel, the alethiometrist, was busy with his books, and an­oth­er fig­ure stood ner­vous­ly by the win­dow. This was Dr. Coop­er, the ex­per­imen­tal the­olo­gi­an from Bolvan­gar. They both looked up.

“Well done, Broth­er Louis,” said the Pres­ident. “Bring it here, sit down, show me, show me. Well done!”

Fra Pavel moved some of his books, and the young priest laid the gold chain on the ta­ble. The oth­ers bent over to look as Fa­ther MacPhail fid­dled with the catch. Dr. Coop­er of­fered him a pock­etknife, and then there was a soft click.

“Ah!” sighed the Pres­ident.

Lord Roke climbed to the top of the desk so that he could see. In the naph­tha lamp­light there was a gleam of dark gold: it was a lock of hair, and the Pres­ident was twist­ing it be­tween his fin­gers, turn­ing it this way and that.

“Are we cer­tain this is the child’s?” he said.

“I am cer­tain,” came the weary voice of Fra Pavel.

“And is there enough of it, Dr. Coop­er?”

The pale­faced man bent low and took the lock from Fa­ther MacPhail’s fin­gers. He held it up to the light.

“Oh yes,” he said. “One sin­gle hair would he enough. This is am­ple.”

“I’m very pleased to hear it,” said the Pres­ident. “Now, Broth­er Louis, you must re­turn the lock­et to the good la­dy’s neck.”

The priest sagged faint­ly: he had hoped his task was over. The Pres­ident placed the curl of Lyra’s hair in an en­ve­lope and shut the lock­et, look­ing up and around as he did so, and Lord Roke had to drop out of sight.

“Fa­ther Pres­ident,” said Broth­er Louis, “I shall of course do as you com­mand, hut may I know why you need the child’s hair?”

“No, Broth­er Louis, be­cause it would dis­turb you. Leave these mat­ters to us. Off you go.”

The young man took the lock­et and left, smoth­er­ing his re­sent­ment. Lord Roke thought of go­ing back with him and wak­ing Mrs. Coul­ter just as he was try­ing to re­place the chain, in or­der to see what she’d do; but it was more im­por­tant to find out what these peo­ple were up to.

As the door closed, the Gal­livespi­an went back in­to the shad­ows and lis­tened.

“How did you know where she had it?” said the sci­en­tist.

“Ev­ery time she men­tioned the child,” the Pres­ident said, “her hand went to the lock­et. Now then, how soon can it be ready?”

“A mat­ter of hours,” said Dr. Coop­er.

“And the hair? What do you do with that?”

“We place the hair in the res­onat­ing cham­ber. You un­der­stand, each in­di­vid­ual is unique, and the ar­range­ment of ge­net­ic par­ti­cles quite dis­tinct… Well, as soon as it’s an­alyzed, the in­for­ma­tion is cod­ed in a se­ries of an­bar­ic puls­es and trans­ferred to the aim­ing de­vice. That lo­cates the ori­gin of the ma­te­ri­al, the hair, wher­ev­er she may be. It’s a pro­cess that ac­tu­al­ly makes use of the Barnard­Stokes heresy, the many­worlds idea…”

“Don’t alarm your­self, Doc­tor. Fra Pavel has told me that the child is in an­oth­er world. Please go on. The force of the bomb is di­rect­ed by means of the hair?”

“Yes. To each of the hairs from which these ones were cut. That’s right.”

“So when it’s det­onat­ed, the child will be de­stroyed, wher­ev­er she is?”

There was a heavy in­drawn breath from the sci­en­tist, and then a re­luc­tant “Yes.” He sw­al­lowed, and went on, “The pow­er need­ed is enor­mous. The an­bar­ic pow­er, just as an atom­ic bomb needs a high ex­plo­sive to force the ura­ni­um to­geth­er and set off the chain re­ac­tion, this de­vice needs a co­los­sal cur­rent to re­lease the much greater pow­er of the sev­er­an­ce pro­cess. I was won­der­ing…

“It doesn’t mat­ter where it’s det­onat­ed, does it?”

“No. That is the point. Any­where will do.”

“And it’s com­plete­ly ready?”

“Now we have the hair, yes. But the pow­er, you see…

“I have seen to that. The hy­droan­bar­ic gen­er­at­ing sta­tion at Sain­tJean­le­sEaux has been req­ui­si­tioned for our use. They pro­duce enough pow­er there, wouldn’t you say?”

“Yes,” said the sci­en­tist.

“Then we shall set out at once. Please go and see to the ap­pa­ra­tus, Dr. Coop­er. Have it ready for trans­por­ta­tion as soon as you can. The weath­er changes quick­ly in the moun­tains, and there is a storm on the way.”

The sci­en­tist took the lit­tle en­ve­lope con­tain­ing Lyra’s hair and bowed ner­vous­ly as he left. Lord Roke left with him, mak­ing no more noise than a shad­ow.

As soon as they were out of earshot of the Pres­ident’s room, the Gal­livespi­an sprang. Dr. Coop­er, be­low him on the stairs, felt an ag­oniz­ing stab in his shoul­der and grabbed for the ban­is­ter; but his arm was strange­ly weak, and he slipped and tum­bled down the whole flight, to land se­mi­con­scious at the bot­tom.

Lord Roke hauled the en­ve­lope out of the man’s twitch­ing hand with some dif­fi­cul­ty, for it was half as big as he was, and set off in the shad­ows to­ward the room where Mrs. Coul­ter was asleep.

The gap at the foot of the door was wide enough for him to slip through. Broth­er Louis had come and gone, but he hadn’t dared to try and fas­ten the chain around Mrs. Coul­ter’s neck: it lay be­side her on the pil­low.

Lord Roke pressed her hand to wake her up. She was pro­found­ly ex­haust­ed, but she fo­cused on him at once and sat up, rub­bing her eyes.

He ex­plained what had hap­pened and gave her the en­ve­lope.

“You should de­stroy it at once,” he told her. “One sin­gle hair would be enough, the man said.”

She looked at the lit­tle curl of dark blond hair and shook her head.

“Too late for that,” she said. “This is on­ly half the lock I cut from Lyra. He must have kept back some of it.”

Lord Roke hissed with anger.

“When he looked around!” he said. “Ach… I moved to be out of his sight, he must have set it aside then…”

“And there’s no way of know­ing where he’ll have put it,” said Mrs. Coul­ter. “Still, if we can find the bomb…

“Shh!”

That was the gold­en mon­key. He was crouch­ing by the door, lis­ten­ing, and then they heard it, too: heavy foot­steps hur­ry­ing to­ward the room.

Mrs. Coul­ter thrust the en­ve­lope and the lock of hair at Lord Roke, who took it and leapt for the top of the wardrobe. Then she lay down next to her dae­mon as the key turned nois­ily in the door.

“Where is it? What have you done with it? How did you at­tack Dr. Coop­er?” said the Pres­ident’s harsh voice as the light fell across the bed.

Mrs. Coul­ter threw up an arm to shade her eyes and strug­gled to sit up.

“You do like to keep your guests en­ter­tained,” she said drowsi­ly. “Is this a new game? What do I have to do? And who is Dr. Coop­er?”

The guard from the gate­house had come in with Fa­ther MacPhail and was shin­ing a torch in­to the cor­ners of the room and un­der the bed. The Pres­ident was slight­ly dis­con­cert­ed: Mrs. Coul­ter’s eyes were heavy with sleep, and she could hard­ly see in the glare from the cor­ri­dor light. It was ob­vi­ous that she hadn’t left her bed.

“You have an ac­com­plice,” he said. “Some­one has at­tacked a guest of the Col­lege. Who is it? Who came here with you? Where is he?”

“I haven’t the faintest idea what you’re talk­ing about. And what’s this… ?”

Her hand, which she’d put down to help her­self sit up, had found the lock­et on the pil­low. She stopped, picked it up, and looked at the Pres­ident with wideopen sleepy eyes, and Lord Roke saw a su­perb piece of act­ing as she said, puz­zled, “But this is my… what’s it do­ing here? Fa­ther MacPhail, who’s been in here? Some­one has tak­en this from around my neck. And, where is Lyra’s hair? There was a lock of my child’s hair in here. Who’s tak­en it? Why? What’s go­ing on?”

And now she was stand­ing, her hair dis­or­dered, pas­sion in her voice, plain­ly just as be­wil­dered as the Pres­ident him­self.

Fa­ther MacPhail took a step back­ward and put his hand to his head.

“Some­one else must have come with you. There must he an ac­com­plice,” he said, his voice rasp­ing at the air. “Where is he hid­ing?”

“I have no ac­com­plice,” she said an­gri­ly. “If there’s an in­vis­ible as­sas­sin in this place, I can on­ly imag­ine it’s the Dev­il him­self. I dare say he feels quite at home.”

Fa­ther MacPhail said to the guard, “Take her to the cel­lars. Put her in chains. I know just what we can do with this wom­an; I should have thought of it as soon as she ap­peared.”

She looked wild­ly around and met Lord Roke’s eyes for a frac­tion of a sec­ond, glit­ter­ing in the dark­ness near the ceil­ing. He caught her ex­pres­sion at once and un­der­stood ex­act­ly what she meant him to do.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-FIVE - SAINT-JEAN-LES-EAUX


The cataract of Sain­tJean­le­sEaux plunged be­tween pin­na­cles of rock at the east­ern end of a spur of the Alps, and the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion clung to the side of the moun­tain above it. It was a wild re­gion, a bleak and bat­tered wilder­ness, and no one would have built any­thing there at all had it not been for the promise of driv­ing great an­bar­ic gen­er­ators with the pow­er of the thou­sands of tons of wa­ter that roared through the gorge.

It was the night fol­low­ing Mrs. Coul­ter’s ar­rest, and the weath­er was stormy. Near the sheer stone front of the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion, a zep­pelin slowed to a hov­er in the buf­fet­ing wind. The search­lights be­low the craft made it look as if it were stand­ing on sev­er­al legs of light and grad­ual­ly low­er­ing it­self to lie down.

But the pi­lot wasn’t sat­is­fied; the wind was swept in­to ed­dies and cross­gusts by the edges of the moun­tain. Be­sides, the ca­bles, the py­lons, the trans­form­ers were too close: to be swept in among them, with a zep­pelin full of in­flammable gas, would be in­stant­ly fa­tal. Sleet drummed slant­wise at the great rigid en­ve­lope of the craft, mak­ing a noise that al­most drowned the clat­ter and howl of the strain­ing en­gines, and ob­scur­ing the view of the ground.

“Not here,” the pi­lot shout­ed over the noise. “We’ll go around the spur.”

Fa­ther MacPhail watched fierce­ly as the pi­lot moved the throt­tle for­ward and ad­just­ed the trim of the en­gines. The zep­pelin rose with a lurch and moved over the rim of the moun­tain. Those legs of light sud­den­ly length­ened and seemed to feel their way down the ridge, their low­er ends lost in the whirl of sleet and rain.

“You can’t get clos­er to the sta­tion than this?” said the Pres­ident, lean­ing for­ward to let his voice car­ry to the pi­lot.

“Not if you want to land,” the pi­lot said.

“Yes, we want to land. Very well, put us down be­low the ridge.”

The pi­lot gave or­ders for the crew to pre­pare to moor. Since the equip­ment they were go­ing to un­load was heavy as well as del­icate, it was im­por­tant to make the craft se­cure. The Pres­ident set­tled back, tap­ping his fin­gers on the arm of his seat, gnaw­ing his lip, but say­ing noth­ing and let­ting the pi­lot work un­flus­tered.

From his hid­ing place in the trans­verse bulk­heads at the rear of the cab­in, Lord Roke watched. Sev­er­al times dur­ing the flight his lit­tle shad­owy form had passed along be­hind the met­al mesh, clear­ly vis­ible to any­one who might have looked, if on­ly they had turned their heads; but in or­der to hear what was hap­pen­ing, he had to come to a place where they could see him. The risk was un­avoid­able.

He edged for­ward, lis­ten­ing hard through the roar of the en­gines, the thun­der of the hail and sleet, the high­pitched singing of the wind in the wires, and the clat­ter of boot­ed feet on met­al walk­ways. The flight en­gi­neer called some fig­ures to the pi­lot, who con­firmed them, and Lord Roke sank back in­to the shad­ows, hold­ing tight to the struts and beams as the air­ship plunged and tilt­ed.

Fi­nal­ly, sens­ing from the move­ment that the craft was near­ly an­chored, he made his way back through the skin of the cab­in to the seats on the star­board side.

There were men pass­ing through in both di­rec­tions: crew mem­bers, tech­ni­cians, priests. Many of their dae­mons were dogs, brim­ming with cu­rios­ity. On the oth­er side of the aisle, Mrs. Coul­ter sat awake and silent, her gold­en dae­mon watch­ing ev­ery­thing from her lap and ex­ud­ing mal­ice.

Lord Roke wait­ed for the chance and then dart­ed across to Mrs. Coul­ter’s seat, and was up in the shad­ow of her shoul­der in a mo­ment.

“What are they do­ing?” she mur­mured.

“Land­ing. We’re near the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion.”

“Are you go­ing to stay with me, or work on your own?” she whis­pered.

“I’ll stay with you. I’ll have to hide un­der your coat.”

She was wear­ing a heavy sheep­skin coat, un­com­fort­ably hot in the heat­ed cab­in, but with her hands man­acled she couldn’t take it off.

“Go on, now,” she said, look­ing around, and he dart­ed in­side the breast, find­ing a furlined pock­et where he could sit se­cure­ly. The gold­en mon­key tucked Mrs. Coul­ter’s silk col­lar in­side so­lic­itous­ly, for all the world like a fas­tid­ious cou­turi­er at­tend­ing to his fa­vorite mod­el, while all the time mak­ing sure that Lord Roke was com­plete­ly hid­den in the folds of the coat.

He was just in time. Not a minute lat­er a sol­di­er armed with a ri­fle came to or­der Mrs. Coul­ter out of the air­ship.

“Must I have these hand­cuffs on?” she said.

“I haven’t been told to re­move them,” he replied. “On your feet, please.”

“But it’s hard to move if I can’t hold on to things. I’m stiff, I’ve been sit­ting here for the best part of a day with­out mov­ing, and you know I haven’t got any weapons, be­cause you searched me. Go and ask the Pres­ident if it’s re­al­ly nec­es­sary to man­acle me. Am I go­ing to try and run away in this wilder­ness?”

Lord Roke was im­per­vi­ous to her charm, but in­ter­est­ed in its ef­fect on oth­ers. The guard was a young man; they should have sent a griz­zled old war­ri­or.

“Well,” said the guard, “I’m sure you won’t, ma’am, but I can’t do what I en’t been or­dered to do. You see that, I’m sure. Please stand up, ma’am, and if you stum­ble, I’ll catch hold of your arm.”

She stood up, and Lord Roke felt her move clum­si­ly for­ward. She was the most grace­ful hu­man the Gal­livespi­an had ev­er seen; this clum­si­ness was feigned. As they reached the head of the gang­way, Lord Roke felt her stum­ble and cry out in alarm, and felt the jar as the guard’s arm caught her. He heard the change in the sounds around them, too; the howl of the wind, the en­gines turn­ing over stea­di­ly to gen­er­ate pow­er for the lights, voic­es from some­where near­by giv­ing or­ders.

They moved down the gang­way, Mrs. Coul­ter lean­ing heav­ily on the guard. She was speak­ing soft­ly, and Lord Roke could just make out his re­ply.

“The sergeant, ma’am, over there by the large crate, he’s got the keys. But I daren’t ask him, ma’am, I’m sor­ry.”

“Oh well,” she said with a pret­ty sigh of re­gret. “Thank you any­way.”

Lord Roke heard boot­ed feet mov­ing away over rock, and then she whis­pered: “You heard about the keys?”

“Tell me where the sergeant is. I need to know where and how far.”

“About ten of my paces away. To the right. A big man. I can see the keys in a bunch at his waist.”

“No good un­less I know which one. Did you see them lock the man­acles?”

“Yes. A short, stub­by key with black tape wound around it.”

Lord Roke climbed down hand over hand in the thick fleece of her coat, un­til he reached the hem at the lev­el of her knees. There he clung and looked around.

They had rigged a flood­light, which made the wet rocks glis­ten bril­liant­ly. But as he looked down, cast­ing around for shad­ows, he saw the glare be­gin to swing side­ways in a gust of wind. He heard a shout, and the light went out abrupt­ly.

He dropped to the ground at once and sprang through the dash­ing sleet to­ward the sergeant, who had lurched for­ward to try and catch the falling flood­light.

In the con­fu­sion Lord Roke leapt at the big man’s leg as it swung past him, seized the cam­ou­flage cot­ton of the trousers, heavy and sod­den with rain al­ready, and kicked a spur in­to the flesh just above the boot.

The sergeant gave a grunt­ing cry and fell clum­si­ly, grasp­ing his leg, try­ing to breathe, try­ing to call out. Lord Roke let go and sprang away from the falling body.

No one had no­ticed: the noise of the wind and the en­gines and the pound­ing hail cov­ered the man’s cry, and in the dark­ness his body couldn’t be seen. But there were oth­ers close by, and Lord Roke had to work quick­ly. He leapt to the fall­en man’s side, where the bunch of keys lay in a pool of icy wa­ter, and hauled aside the great shafts of steel, as big around as his arm and half as long as he was, till he found the one with the black tape. And then there was the clasp of the key ring to wres­tle with, and the per­pet­ual risk of the hail, which for a Gal­livespi­an was dead­ly: blocks of ice as big as his two fists.

And then a voice above him said, “You all right, Sergeant?”

The sol­di­er’s dae­mon was growl­ing and nuz­zling at the sergeant’s, who had fall­en in­to a se­mis­tu­por. Lord Roke couldn’t wait: a spring and a kick, and the oth­er man fell be­side the sergeant.

Haul­ing, wrestling, heav­ing, Lord Roke fi­nal­ly snapped open the key ring, and then he had to lift six oth­er keys out of the way be­fore the black­taped one was free. Any sec­ond now they’d get the light back on, but even in the half­dark they could hard­ly miss two men ly­ing un­con­scious …

And as he hoist­ed the key out, a shout went up. He hauled up the mas­sive shaft with all the strength he had, tug­ging, heav­ing, lift­ing, crawl­ing, drag­ging, and hid be­side a small boul­der just as pound­ing feet ar­rived and voic­es called for light. “Shot?”

“Didn’t hear a thing… “Are they breath­ing?”

Then the flood­light, se­cure again, snapped on once more. Lord Roke was caught in the open, as clear as a fox in the head­lights of a car. He stood stock­still, his eyes mov­ing left and right, and once he was sure that ev­ery­one’s at­ten­tion was on the two men who had fall­en so mys­te­ri­ous­ly, he hauled the key to his shoul­der and ran around the pud­dles and the boul­ders un­til he reached Mrs. Coul­ter.

A sec­ond lat­er she had un­locked the hand­cuffs and low­ered them silent­ly to the ground. Lord Roke leapt for the hem of her coat and ran up to her shoul­der.

“Where’s the bomb?” he said, close to her ear. “They’ve just be­gun to un­load it. It’s the big crate on the ground over there. I can’t do any­thing till they take it out, and even then…

“All right,” he said, “run. Hide your­self. I’ll stay here and watch. Run!”

He leapt down to her sleeve and sprang away. With­out a sound she moved away from the light, slow­ly at first so as not to catch the eye of the guard, and then she crouched and ran in­to the rain­lashed dark­ness far­ther up the slope, the gold­en mon­key dart­ing ahead to see the way.

Be­hind her she heard the con­tin­uing roar of the en­gines, the con­fused shouts, the pow­er­ful voice of the Pres­ident try­ing to im­pose some or­der on the scene. She re­mem­bered the long, hor­ri­ble pain and hal­lu­ci­na­tion that she’d suf­fered at the spur of the Che­va­li­er Tialys, and didn’t en­vy the two men their wak­ing up.

But soon she was high­er up, clam­ber­ing over the wet rocks, and all she could see be­hind her was the wa­ver­ing glow of the flood­light re­flect­ed back from the great curved bel­ly of the zep­pelin; and present­ly that went out again, and all she could hear was the en­gine roar, strain­ing vain­ly against the wind and the thun­der of the cataract be­low.

The en­gi­neers from the hy­droan­bar­ic sta­tion were strug­gling over the edge of the gorge to bring a pow­er ca­ble to the bomb.

The prob­lem for Mrs. Coul­ter was not how to get out of this sit­ua­tion alive: that was a sec­ondary mat­ter. The prob­lem was how to get Lyra’s hair out of the bomb be­fore they set it off. Lord Roke had burned the hair from the en­ve­lope af­ter her ar­rest, let­ting the wind take the ash­es away in­to the night sky; and then he’d found his way to the lab­ora­to­ry and watched as they placed the rest of the lit­tle dark gold­en curl in the res­onat­ing cham­ber in prepa­ra­tion. He knew ex­act­ly where it was, and how to open the cham­ber, but the bril­liant light and the glit­ter­ing sur­faces in the lab­ora­to­ry, not to men­tion the con­stant com­ing and go­ing of tech­ni­cians, made it im­pos­si­ble for him to do any­thing about it there.

So they’d have to re­move the lock of hair af­ter the bomb was set up.

And that was go­ing to be even hard­er, be­cause of what the Pres­ident in­tend­ed to do with Mrs. Coul­ter. The en­er­gy of the bomb came from cut­ting the link be­tween hu­man and dae­mon, and that meant the hideous pro­cess of in­ter­ci­sion: the cages of mesh, the sil­ver guil­lo­tine. He was go­ing to sev­er the life­long con­nec­tion be­tween her and the gold­en mon­key and use the pow­er re­leased by that to de­stroy her daugh­ter. She and Lyra would per­ish by the means she her­self had in­vent­ed. It was neat, at least, she thought.

Her on­ly hope was Lord Roke. But in their whis­pered ex­changes in the zep­pelin, he’d ex­plained about the pow­er of his poi­son spurs: he couldn’t go on us­ing them con­tin­ual­ly, be­cause with each sting, the ven­om weak­ened. It took a day for the full po­ten­cy to build up again. Be­fore long his main weapon would lose its force, and then they’d on­ly have their wits.

She found an over­hang­ing rock next to the roots of a spruce tree that clung to the side of the gorge, and set­tled her­self be­neath it to look around.

Be­hind her and above, over the lip of the ravine and in the full force of the wind, stood the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion. The en­gi­neers were rig­ging a se­ries of lights to help them bring the ca­ble to the bomb: she could hear their voic­es not far away, shout­ing com­mands, and see the lights wa­ver­ing through the trees. The ca­ble it­self, as thick as a man’s arm, was be­ing hauled from a gi­gan­tic reel on a truck at the top of the slope, and at the rate they were edg­ing their way down over the rocks, they’d reach the bomb in five min­utes or less.

At the zep­pelin Fa­ther MacPhail had ral­lied the sol­diers. Sev­er­al men stood guard, look­ing out in­to the sleet­filled dark with ri­fles at the ready, while oth­ers opened the wood­en crate con­tain­ing the bomb and made it ready for the ca­ble. Mrs. Coul­ter could see it clear­ly in the wash of the flood­lights, stream­ing with rain, an un­gain­ly mass of ma­chin­ery and wiring slight­ly tilt­ed on the rocky ground. She heard a high­ten­sion crack­le and hum from the lights, whose ca­bles swung in the wind, scat­ter­ing the rain and throw­ing shad­ows up over the rocks and down again, like a grotesque jump rope.

Mrs. Coul­ter was hor­ri­bly fa­mil­iar with one part of the struc­ture: the mesh cages, the sil­ver blade above. They stood at one end of the ap­pa­ra­tus. The rest of it was strange to her; she could see no prin­ci­ple be­hind the coils, the jars, the banks of in­su­la­tors, the lat­tice of tub­ing. Nev­er­the­less, some­where in all that com­plex­ity was the lit­tle lock of hair on which ev­ery­thing de­pend­ed.

To her left the slope fell away in­to the dark, and far be­low was a glim­mer of white and a thun­der of wa­ter from the cataract of Sain­tJean­le­sEaux.

There came a cry. A sol­di­er dropped his ri­fle and stum­bled for­ward, falling to the ground, kick­ing and thrash­ing and groan­ing with pain. In re­sponse the Pres­ident looked up to the sky, put his hands to his mouth, and ut­tered a pierc­ing yell.

What was he do­ing?

A mo­ment lat­er Mrs. Coul­ter found out. Of all un­like­ly things, a witch flew down and land­ed be­side the Pres­ident as he shout­ed above the wind:

“Search near­by! There is a crea­ture of some kind help­ing the wom­an. It’s at­tacked sev­er­al of my men al­ready. You can see through the dark. Find it and kill it!”

“There is some­thing com­ing,” said the witch in a tone that car­ried clear­ly to Mrs. Coul­ter’s shel­ter. “I can see it in the north.”

“Nev­er mind that. Find the crea­ture and de­stroy it,” said the Pres­ident. “It can’t be far away. And look for the wom­an, too.

The witch sprang in­to the air again.

Sud­den­ly the mon­key seized Mrs. Coul­ter’s hand and point­ed.

There was Lord Roke, ly­ing in the open on a patch of moss. How could they not have seen him? But some­thing had hap­pened, for he wasn’t mov­ing.

“Go and bring him back,” she said, and the mon­key, crouch­ing low, dart­ed from one rock to an­oth­er, mak­ing for the lit­tle patch of green among the rocks. His gold­en fur was soon dark­ened by the rain and plas­tered close to his body, mak­ing him small­er and less easy to see, but all the same he was hor­ri­bly con­spic­uous.

Fa­ther MacPhail, mean­while, had turned to the bomb again. The en­gi­neers from the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion had brought their ca­ble right down to it, and the tech­ni­cians were busy se­cur­ing the clamps and mak­ing ready the ter­mi­nals.

Mrs. Coul­ter won­dered what he in­tend­ed to do, now that his vic­tim had es­caped. Then the Pres­ident turned to look over his shoul­der, and she saw his ex­pres­sion. It was so fixed and in­tense that he looked more like a mask than a man. His lips were mov­ing in prayer, his eyes were turned up wide open as the rain beat in­to them, and al­to­geth­er he looked like some gloomy Span­ish paint­ing of a saint in the ec­sta­sy of mar­tyr­dom. Mrs. Coul­ter felt a sud­den bolt of fear, be­cause she knew ex­act­ly what he in­tend­ed: he was go­ing to sac­ri­fice him­self. The bomb would work whether or not she was part of it.

Dart­ing from rock to rock, the gold­en mon­key reached Lord Roke.

“My left leg is bro­ken,” said the Gal­livespi­an calm­ly. “The last man stepped on me. Lis­ten care­ful­ly…

As the mon­key lift­ed him away from the lights, Lord Roke ex­plained ex­act­ly where the res­onat­ing cham­ber was and how to open it. They were prac­ti­cal­ly un­der the eyes of the sol­diers, but step by step, from shad­ow to shad­ow, the dae­mon crept with his lit­tle bur­den.

Mrs. Coul­ter, watch­ing and bit­ing her lip, heard a rush of air and felt a heavy knock, not to her body, but to the tree. An ar­row stuck there quiv­er­ing less than a hand’s breadth from her left arm. At once she rolled away, be­fore the witch could shoot an­oth­er, and tum­bled down the slope to­ward the mon­key.

And then ev­ery­thing was hap­pen­ing at once, too quick­ly: there was a burst of gun­fire, and a cloud of acrid smoke bil­lowed across the slope, though she saw no flames. The gold­en mon­key, see­ing Mrs. Coul­ter at­tacked, set Lord Roke down and sprang to her de­fense, just as the witch flew down, knife at the ready. Lord Roke pushed him­self back against the near­est rock, and Mrs. Coul­ter grap­pled di­rect­ly with the witch. They wres­tled fu­ri­ous­ly among the rocks, while the gold­en mon­key set about tear­ing all the nee­dles from the witch’s cloud­pine branch.

Mean­while, the Pres­ident was thrust­ing his lizard dae­mon in­to the small­er of the sil­ver mesh cages. She writhed and screamed and kicked and bit, but he struck her off his hand and slammed the door shut quick­ly. The tech­ni­cians were mak­ing the fi­nal ad­just­ments, check­ing their me­ters and gauges.

Out of nowhere a seag­ull flew down with a wild cry and seized the Gal­livespi­an in his claw. It was the witch’s dae­mon. Lord Roke fought hard, but the bird had him too tight­ly, and then the witch tore her­self from Mrs. Coul­ter’s grasp, snatched the tat­tered pine branch, and leapt in­to the air to join her dae­mon.

Mrs. Coul­ter hurled her­self to­ward the bomb, feel­ing the smoke at­tack her nose and throat like claws: tear gas. The sol­diers, most of them, had fall­en or stum­bled away chok­ing (and where had the gas come from? she won­dered), but now, as the wind dis­persed it, they were be­gin­ning to gath­er them­selves again. The great ribbed bel­ly of the zep­pelin bulked over the bomb, strain­ing at its ca­bles in the wind, its sil­ver sides run­ning with mois­ture.

But then a sound from high above made Mrs. Coul­ter’s ears ring: a scream so high and hor­ri­fied that even the gold­en mon­key clutched her in fear. And a sec­ond lat­er, pitch­ing down in a swirl of white limbs, black silk, and green twigs, the witch fell right at the feet of Fa­ther MacPhail, her bones crunch­ing au­di­bly on the rock.

Mrs. Coul­ter dart­ed for­ward to see if Lord Roke had sur­vived the fall. But the Gal­livespi­an was dead. His right spur was deep in the witch’s neck.

The witch her­self was still just alive, and her mouth moved shud­der­ing­ly, say­ing, “Some­thing com­ing, some­thing else… com­ing…”

It made no sense. The Pres­ident was al­ready step­ping over her body to reach the larg­er cage. His dae­mon was run­ning up and down the sides of the oth­er, her lit­tle claws mak­ing the sil­ver mesh ring, her voice cry­ing for pity.

The gold­en mon­key leapt for Fa­ther MacPhail, but not to at­tack: he scram­bled up and over the man’s shoul­ders to reach the com­plex heart of the wires and the pipe work, the res­onat­ing cham­ber. The Pres­ident tried to grab him, but Mrs. Coul­ter seized the man’s arm and tried to pull him back. She couldn’t see: the rain was driv­ing in­to her eyes, and there was still gas in the air.

And all around there was gun­fire. What was hap­pen­ing?

The flood­lights swung in the wind, so that noth­ing seemed steady, not even the black rocks of the moun­tain­side. The Pres­ident and Mrs. Coul­ter fought hand to hand, scratch­ing, punch­ing, tear­ing, pulling, bit­ing, and she was tired and he was strong; but she was des­per­ate, too, and she might have pulled him away, but part of her was watch­ing her dae­mon as he ma­nip­ulat­ed the han­dles, his fierce black paws snap­ping the mech­anism this way, that way, pulling, twist­ing, reach­ing in…

Then came a blow to her tem­ple. She fell stunned, and the Pres­ident broke free and hauled him­self bleed­ing in­to the cage, drag­ging the door shut af­ter him.

And the mon­key had the cham­ber open, a glass door on heavy hinges, and he was reach­ing in­side, and there was the lock of hair: held be­tween rub­ber pads in a met­al clasp! Still more to un­do; and Mrs. Coul­ter was haul­ing her­self up with shak­ing hands. She shook the sil­very mesh with all her might, look­ing up at the blade, the spark­ing ter­mi­nals, the man in­side. The mon­key was un­screw­ing the clasp, and the Pres­ident, his face a mask of grim ex­ul­ta­tion, was twist­ing wires to­geth­er.

There was a flash of in­tense white, a lash­ing crack, and the mon­key’s form was flung high in the air. With him came a lit­tle cloud of gold: was it Lyra’s hair? Was it his own fur? What­ev­er it was, it blew away at once in the dark. Mrs. Coul­ter’s right hand had con­vulsed so tight­ly that it clung to the mesh, leav­ing her halfly­ing, halfhang­ing, while her head rang and her heart pound­ed.

But some­thing had hap­pened to her sight. A ter­ri­ble clar­ity had come over her eyes, the pow­er to see the most tiny de­tails, and they were fo­cused on the one de­tail in the uni­verse that mat­tered: stuck to one of the pads of the clasp in the res­onat­ing cham­ber, there was a sin­gle dark gold hair.

She cried a great wail of an­guish, and shook and shook the cage, try­ing to loosen the hair with the lit­tle strength she had left. The Pres­ident passed his hands over his face, wip­ing it clear of the rain. His mouth moved as though he were speak­ing, but she couldn’t hear a word. She tore at the mesh, help­less, and then hurled her whole weight against the ma­chine as he brought two wires to­geth­er with a spark. In ut­ter si­lence the bril­liant sil­ver blade shot down.

Some­thing ex­plod­ed, some­where, but Mrs. Coul­ter was be­yond feel­ing it.

There were hands lift­ing her up: Lord As­riel’s hands. There was noth­ing to be sur­prised at any­more; the in­ten­tion craft stood be­hind him, poised on the slope and per­fect­ly lev­el. He lift­ed her in his arms and car­ried her to the craft, ig­nor­ing the gun­fire, the bil­low­ing smoke, the cries of alarm and con­fu­sion.

“Is he dead? Did it go off?” she man­aged to say.

Lord As­riel climbed in be­side her, and the snow leop­ard leapt in, too, the half­stunned mon­key in her mouth. Lord As­riel took the con­trols and the craft sprang at once in­to the air. Through paindazed eyes Mrs. Coul­ter looked down at the moun­tain slope. Men were run­ning here and there like ants; some lay dead, while oth­ers crawled bro­ken­ly over the rocks; the great ca­ble from the gen­er­at­ing sta­tion snaked down through the chaos, the on­ly pur­pose­ful thing in sight, mak­ing its way to the glit­ter­ing bomb, where the Pres­ident’s body lay crum­pled in­side the cage.

“Lord Roke?” said Lord As­riel.

“Dead,” she whis­pered.

He pressed a but­ton, and a lance of flame jet­ted to­ward the toss­ing, sway­ing zep­pelin. An in­stant lat­er the whole air­ship bloomed in­to a rose of white fire, en­gulf­ing the in­ten­tion craft, which hung mo­tion­less and un­harmed in the mid­dle of it. Lord As­riel moved the craft un­hur­ried­ly away, and they watched as the blaz­ing zep­pelin fell slow­ly, slow­ly down on top of the whole scene, bomb, ca­ble, sol­diers, and all, and ev­ery­thing be­gan to tum­ble in a wel­ter of smoke and flames down the moun­tain­side, gath­er­ing speed and in­cin­er­at­ing the resinous trees as it went, un­til it plunged in­to the white wa­ters of the cataract, which whirled it all away in­to the dark.

Lord As­riel touched the con­trols again and the in­ten­tion craft be­gan to speed away north­ward. But Mrs. Coul­ter couldn’t take her eyes off the scene; she watched be­hind them for a long time, gaz­ing with tearfilled eyes at the fire, un­til it was no more than a ver­ti­cal line of or­ange scratched on the dark and wreathed in smoke and steam, and then it was noth­ing.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-SIX - THE ABYSS


It was dark, with an en­fold­ing black­ness that pressed on Lyra’s eyes so heav­ily that she al­most felt the weight of the thou­sands of tons of rock above them. The on­ly light they had came from the lu­mi­nous tail of the La­dy Salmakia’s drag­on­fly, and even that was fad­ing; for the poor in­sects had found no food in the world of the dead, and the Che­va­li­er’s had died not long be­fore.

So while Tialys sat on Will’s shoul­der, Lyra held the La­dy’s drag­on­fly in her hands as the La­dy soothed it and whis­pered to the trem­bling crea­ture, feed­ing it first on crumbs of bis­cuit and then on her own blood. If Lyra had seen her do that, she would have of­fered hers, since there was more of it; but it was all she could do to con­cen­trate on plac­ing her feet safe­ly and avoid­ing the low­est parts of the rock above.

NoN­ame the harpy had led them in­to a sys­tem of caves that would bring them, she said, to the near­est point in the world of the dead from which they could open a win­dow to an­oth­er world. Be­hind them came the end­less col­umn of ghosts. The tun­nel was full of whis­pers, as the fore­most en­cour­aged those be­hind, as the brave urged on the faint­heart­ed, as the old gave hope to the young.

“Is it much far­ther, NoN­ame?” said Lyra qui­et­ly. “Be­cause this poor drag­on­fly’s dy­ing, and then his light’ll go out.”

The harpy stopped and turned to say:

“Just fol­low. If you can’t see, lis­ten. If you can’t hear, feel.”

Her eyes shone fierce in the gloom. Lyra nod­ded and said, “Yes, I will, but I’m not as strong as I used to be, and I’m not brave, not very any­way. Please don’t stop. I’ll fol­low you, we all will. Please keep go­ing, NoN­ame.”

The harpy turned back and moved on. The drag­on­fly shine was get­ting dim­mer by the minute, and Lyra knew it would soon be com­plete­ly gone.

But as she stum­bled for­ward, a voice spoke just be­side her, a fa­mil­iar voice.

“Lyra, Lyra, child…”

And she turned in de­light.

“Mr. Scores­by! Oh, I’m so glad to hear you! And it is you, I can see, just, oh, I wish I could touch you!”

In the faint, faint light she made out the lean form and the sar­don­ic smile of the Tex­an aero­naut, and her hand reached for­ward of its own ac­cord, in vain.

“Me too, hon­ey. But lis­ten to me, they’re work­ing some trou­ble out there, and it’s aimed at you, don’t ask me how. Is this the boy with the knife?”

Will had been look­ing at him, ea­ger to see this old com­pan­ion of Lyra’s; but now his eyes went right past Lee to look at the ghost be­side him. Lyra saw at once who it was, and mar­veled at this grownup vi­sion of Will, the same jut­ting jaw, the same way of hold­ing his head.

Will was speech­less, but his fa­ther said:

“Lis­ten, there’s no time to talk about this, just do ex­act­ly as I say. Take the knife now and find a place where a lock has been cut from Lyra’s hair.”

His tone was ur­gent, and Will didn’t waste time ask­ing why. Lyra, her eyes wide with alarm, held up the drag­on­fly with one hand and felt her hair with the oth­er.

“No,” said Will, “take your hand away, I can’t see.”

And in the faint gleam, he could see it: just above her left tem­ple, there was a lit­tle patch of hair that was short­er than the rest.

“Who did that?” said Lyra. “And…

“Hush,” said Will, and asked his fa­ther’s ghost, “What must I do?

“Cut the short hair off right down to her scalp. Col­lect it care­ful­ly, ev­ery sin­gle hair. Don’t miss even one. Then open an­oth­er world, any will do, and put the hair through in­to it, and then close it again. Do it now, at once.”

The harpy was watch­ing, the ghosts be­hind were crowd­ing close. Lyra could see their faint faces in the dim­ness. Fright­ened and be­wil­dered, she stood bit­ing her lip while Will did as his fa­ther told him, his face close up to the knife­point in the pal­ing drag­on­fly light. He cut a lit­tle hol­low space in the rock of an­oth­er world, put all the tiny gold­en hairs in­to it, and re­placed the rock be­fore clos­ing the win­dow.

And then the ground be­gan to shake. From some­where very deep came a growl­ing, grind­ing noise, as if the whole cen­ter of the earth were turn­ing on it­self like a vast mill­wheel, and lit­tle frag­ments of stone be­gan to fall from the roof of the tun­nel. The ground lurched sud­den­ly to one side. Will seized Lyra’s arm, and they clung to­geth­er as the rock un­der their feet be­gan to shift and slide, and loose pieces of stone came tum­bling past, bruis­ing their legs and feet…

The two chil­dren, shel­ter­ing the Gal­livespi­ans, crouched down with their arms over their heads; and then in a hor­ri­ble slid­ing move­ment they found them­selves be­ing borne away down to the left, and they held each oth­er fierce­ly, too breath­less and shak­en even to cry out. Their ears were filled with the roar of thou­sands of tons of rock tum­bling and rolling down with them.

Fi­nal­ly their move­ment stopped, though all around them small­er rocks were still tum­bling and bound­ing down a slope that hadn’t been there a minute be­fore. Lyra was ly­ing on Will’s left arm. With his right hand he felt for the knife; it was still there at his belt.

“Tialys? Salmakia?” said Will shak­ily.

“Both here, both alive,” said the Che­va­li­er’s voice near his ear.

The air was full of dust, and of the cordite smell of smashed rock. It was hard to breathe, and im­pos­si­ble to see: the drag­on­fly was dead.

“Mr. Scores­by?” said Lyra. “We can’t see any­thing… What hap­pened?”

“I’m here,” said Lee, close by. “I guess the bomb went off, and I guess it missed.”

“Bomb?” said Lyra, fright­ened; but then she said, “Roger, are you there?”

“Yeah,” came the lit­tle whis­per. “Mr. Par­ry, he saved me. I was go­ing to fall, and he caught hold.”

“Look,” said the ghost of John Par­ry. “But hold still to the rock, and don’t move.”

The dust was clear­ing, and from some­where there was light: a strange faint gold­en glim­mer, like a lu­mi­nous misty rain falling all around them. It was enough to strike their hearts ablaze with fear, for it lit up what lay to their left, the place in­to which it was all falling, or flow­ing, like a riv­er over the edge of a wa­ter­fall.

It was a vast black emp­ti­ness, like a shaft in­to the deep­est dark­ness. The gold­en light flowed in­to it and died. They could see the oth­er side, but it was much far­ther away than Will could have thrown a stone. To their right, a slope of rough stones, loose and pre­car­ious­ly bal­an­ced, rose high in­to the dusty gloom.

The chil­dren and their com­pan­ions were cling­ing to what was not even a ledge, just some lucky hand- and footholds, on the edge of that abyss, and there was no way out ex­cept for­ward, along the slope, among the shat­tered rocks and the tee­ter­ing boul­ders, which, it seemed, the slight­est touch would send hurtling down be­low.

And be­hind them, as the dust cleared, more and more of the ghosts were gaz­ing in hor­ror at the abyss. They were crouch­ing on the slope, too fright­ened to move. On­ly the harpies were un­afraid; they took to their wings and soared above, scan­ning back­ward and for­ward, fly­ing back to re­as­sure those still in the tun­nel, fly­ing ahead to search for the way out.

Lyra checked: at least the alethiome­ter was safe. Sup­press­ing her fear, she looked around, found Roger’s lit­tle face, and said:

“Come on, then, we’re all still here, we en’t been hurt. And we can see now, at least. So just keep go­ing, just keep on mov­ing. We can’t go any oth­er way than round the edge of this…” She ges­tured at the abyss. “So we just got to keep go­ing ahead. I swear Will and me’ll just keep on till we do. So don’t be scared, don’t give up, don’t lag be­hind. Tell the oth­ers. I can’t look back all the time be­cause I got to watch where I’m go­ing, so I got to trust you to come on steady af­ter us, all right?”

The lit­tle ghost nod­ded. And so, in a shocked si­lence, the col­umn of the dead be­gan their jour­ney along the edge of the abyss. How long it took, nei­ther Lyra nor Will could guess; how fear­ful and dan­ger­ous it was, they were nev­er able to for­get. The dark­ness be­low was so pro­found that it seemed to pull the eye­sight down in­to it, and a ghast­ly dizzi­ness swam over their minds when they looked. When­ev­er they could, they looked ahead of them fixed­ly, on this rock, that foothold, this pro­jec­tion, that loose slope of grav­el, and kept their eyes from the gulf; but it pulled, it tempt­ed, and they couldn’t help glanc­ing in­to it, on­ly to feel their bal­an­ce tilt­ing and their eye­sight swim­ming and a dread­ful nau­sea grip­ping their throats.

From time to time the liv­ing ones looked back and saw the in­fi­nite line of the dead wind­ing out of the crack they’d come through: moth­ers press­ing their in­fants’ faces to their breasts, aged fa­thers clam­ber­ing slow­ly, lit­tle chil­dren clutch­ing the skirts of the per­son in front, young boys and girls of Roger’s age keep­ing staunch and care­ful, so many of them… And all fol­low­ing Will and Lyra, so they still hoped, to­ward the open air.

But some didn’t trust them. They crowd­ed close be­hind, and both chil­dren felt cold hands on their hearts and their en­trails, and they heard vi­cious whis­pers:

“Where is the up­per world? How much far­ther?”

“We’re fright­ened here!”

“We should nev­er have come, at least back in the world of the dead we had a lit­tle light and a lit­tle com­pa­ny, this is far worse!”

“You did a wrong thing when you came to our land! You should have stayed in your own world and wait­ed to die be­fore you came down to dis­turb us!”

“By what right are you lead­ing us? You are on­ly chil­dren! Who gave you the au­thor­ity?”

Will want­ed to turn and de­nounce them, but Lyra held his arm; they were un­hap­py and fright­ened, she said.

Then the La­dy Salmakia spoke, and her clear, calm voice car­ried a long way in the great emp­ti­ness.

“Friends, be brave! Stay to­geth­er and keep go­ing! The way is hard, but Lyra can find it. Be pa­tient and cheer­ful and we’ll lead you out, don’t fear!”

Lyra felt her­self strength­ened by hear­ing this, and that was re­al­ly the La­dy’s in­ten­tion. And so they toiled on, with painful ef­fort.

“Will,” said Lyra af­ter some min­utes, “can you hear that wind?”

“Yes, I can,” said Will. “But I can’t feel it at all. And I tell you some­thing about that hole down there. It’s the same kind of thing as when I cut a win­dow. The same kind of edge. There’s some­thing spe­cial about that kind of edge; once you’ve felt it you nev­er for­get it. And I can see it there, just where the rock falls away in­to the dark. But that big space down there, that’s not an­oth­er world like all the oth­ers. It’s dif­fer­ent. I don’t like it. I wish I could close it up.”

“You haven’t closed ev­ery win­dow you’ve made.”

“No, be­cause I couldn’t, some of them. But I know I should. Things go wrong if they’re left open. And one that big…” He ges­tured down­ward, not want­ing to look. “It’s wrong. Some­thing bad will hap­pen.”

While they were talk­ing to­geth­er, an­oth­er con­ver­sa­tion had been tak­ing place a lit­tle way off: the Che­va­li­er Tialys was talk­ing qui­et­ly with the ghosts of Lee Scores­by and John Par­ry.

“So what are you say­ing, John?” said Lee. “You’re say­ing we ought not to go out in­to the open air? Man, ev­ery sin­gle part of me is aching to join the rest of the liv­ing uni­verse again!”

“Yes, and so am I,” said Will’s fa­ther. “But I be­lieve that if those of us who are used to fight­ing could man­age to hold our­selves back, we might be able to throw our­selves in­to the bat­tle on As­riel’s side. And if it came at the right mo­ment, it might make all the dif­fer­ence.”

“Ghosts?” said Tialys, try­ing to hold the skep­ti­cism from his voice, and fail­ing. “How could you fight?”

“We couldn’t hurt liv­ing crea­tures, that’s quite true. But As­riel’s army is go­ing to con­tend with oth­er kinds of be­ing as well.”

“Those Specters,” said Lee.

“Just what I was think­ing. They make for the dae­mon, don’t they? And our dae­mons are long gone. It’s worth a try, Lee.”

“Well, I’m with you, my friend.”

“And you, sir,” said John Par­ry’s ghost to the Che­va­li­er: “I have spo­ken to the ghosts of your peo­ple. Will you live long enough to see the world again, be­fore you die and come back as a ghost?”

“It’s true, our lives are short com­pared to yours. I have a few days more to live,” said Tialys, “and the La­dy Salmakia a lit­tle longer, per­haps. But thanks to what those chil­dren are do­ing, our ex­ile as ghosts will not be per­ma­nent. I have been proud to help them.”

They moved on. And that abom­in­able fall yawned all the time, and one lit­tle slip, one foot­step on a loose rock, one care­less hand­hold, would send you down for­ev­er and ev­er, thought Lyra, so far down you’d die of star­va­tion be­fore you ev­er hit the bot­tom, and then your poor ghost would go on falling and falling in­to an in­fi­nite gulf, with no one to help, no hands to reach down and lift you out, for­ev­er con­scious and for­ev­er falling…

Oh, that would be far worse than the gray, silent world they were leav­ing, wouldn’t it?

A strange thing hap­pened to her mind then. The thought of falling in­duced a kind of ver­ti­go in Lyra, and she swayed. Will was ahead of her, just too far to reach, or she might have tak­en his hand; but at that mo­ment she was more con­scious of Roger, and a lit­tle flick­er of van­ity blazed up for a mo­ment in her heart. There’d been an oc­ca­sion once on Jor­dan Col­lege roof when just to fright­en him, she’d de­fied her ver­ti­go and walked along the edge of the stone gut­ter.

She looked back to re­mind him of it now. She was Roger’s Lyra, full of grace and dar­ing; she didn’t need to creep along like an in­sect.

But the lit­tle boy’s whis­per­ing voice said, “Lyra, be care­ful, re­mem­ber, you en’t dead like us…

And it seemed to hap­pen so slow­ly, but there was noth­ing she could do: her weight shift­ed, the stones moved un­der her feet, and help­less­ly she be­gan to slide. In the first mo­ment it was an­noy­ing, and then it was com­ic: How sil­ly! she thought. But as she ut­ter­ly failed to hold on to any­thing, as the stones rolled and tum­bled be­neath her, as she slid down to­ward the edge, gath­er­ing speed, the hor­ror of it slammed in­to her. She was go­ing to fall. There was noth­ing to stop her. It was al­ready too late.

Her body con­vulsed with ter­ror. She wasn’t aware of the ghosts who flung them­selves down to try and catch her, on­ly to find her hurtling through them like a stone through mist; she didn’t know that Will was yelling her name so loud­ly that the abyss re­sound­ed with it. In­stead, her whole be­ing was a vor­tex of roar­ing fear. Faster and faster she tum­bled, down and down, and some ghosts couldn’t bear to watch; they hid their eyes and cried aloud.

Will felt elec­tric with fear. He watched in an­guish as Lyra slid far­ther and far­ther, know­ing he could do noth­ing, and know­ing he had to watch. He couldn’t hear the des­per­ate wail he was ut­ter­ing any more than she could. An­oth­er two sec­onds, an­oth­er sec­ond, she was at the edge, she couldn’t stop, she was there, she was falling…

And out of the dark swooped that crea­ture whose claws had raked her scalp not long be­fore, NoN­ame the harpy, wom­an­faced, bird­winged, and those same claws closed tight around the girl’s wrist. To­geth­er they plunged on down, the ex­tra weight al­most too much for the harpy’s strong wings, but they beat and beat and beat, and her claws held firm, and slow­ly, heav­ily, slow­ly, heav­ily, the harpy car­ried the child up and up out of the gulf and brought her limp and faint­ing to Will’s reach­ing arms.

He held her tight, press­ing her to his chest, feel­ing the wild beat of her heart against his ribs. She wasn’t Lyra just then, and he wasn’t Will; she wasn’t a girl, and he wasn’t a boy. They were the on­ly two hu­man be­in­gs in that vast gulf of death. They clung to­geth­er, and the ghosts clus­tered around, whis­per­ing com­fort, bless­ing the harpy. Clos­est at hand were Will’s fa­ther and Lee Scores­by, and how they longed to hold her, too; and Tialys and Salmakia spoke to NoN­ame, prais­ing her, call­ing her the sav­ior of them all, gen­er­ous one, bless­ing her kind­ness.

As soon as Lyra could move, she reached out trem­bling for the harpy and put her arms around her neck, kiss­ing and kiss­ing her rav­aged face. She couldn’t speak. All the words, all the con­fi­dence, all the van­ity had been shak­en out of her.

They lay still for some min­utes. Once the ter­ror had be­gun to sub­side, they set off again, Will hold­ing Lyra’s hand tight­ly in his good one. They crept for­ward, test­ing each spot be­fore they put any weight on it, a pro­cess so slow and weari­some that they thought they might die of fa­tigue; but they couldn’t rest, they couldn’t stop. How could any­one rest, with that fear­ful gulf be­low them?

And af­ter an­oth­er hour of toil, he said to her:

“Look ahead. I think there’s a way out…”

It was true: the slope was get­ting eas­ier, and it was even pos­si­ble to climb slight­ly, up and away from the edge. And ahead: wasn’t that a fold in the wall of the cliff? Could that re­al­ly be a way out?

Lyra looked in­to Will’s bril­liant, strong eyes and smiled.

They clam­bered on, up and far­ther up, with ev­ery step mov­ing far­ther from the abyss. And as they climbed, they found the ground firmer, the hand­holds more se­cure, the footholds less li­able to roll and twist their an­kles.

“We must have climbed a fair way now,” Will said. “I could try the knife and see what I find.”

“Not yet,” said the harpy. “Far­ther to go yet. This is a bad place to open. Bet­ter place high­er up.”

They car­ried on qui­et­ly, hand, foot, weight, move, test, hand, foot…Their fin­gers were raw, their knees and hips were trem­bling with the ef­fort, their heads ached and rang with ex­haus­tion. They climbed the last few feet up to the foot of the cliff, where a nar­row de­file led a lit­tle way in­to the shad­ow.

Lyra watched with aching eyes as Will took the knife and be­gan to search the air, touch­ing, with­draw­ing, search­ing, touch­ing again.

“Ah,” he said.

“You found an open space?”

“I think so…”

“Will,” said his fa­ther’s ghost, “stop a mo­ment. Lis­ten to me.”

Will put down the knife and turned. In all the ef­fort he hadn’t been able to think of his fa­ther, but it was good to know he was there. Sud­den­ly he re­al­ized that they were go­ing to part for the last time.

“What will hap­pen when you go out­side?” Will said. “Will you just van­ish?”

“Not yet. Mr. Scores­by and I have an idea. Some of us will re­main here for a lit­tle while, and we shall need you to let us in­to Lord As­riel’s world, be­cause he might need our help. What’s more,” he went on somber­ly, look­ing at Lyra, “you’ll need to trav­el there your­selves, if you want to find your dae­mons again. Be­cause that’s where they’ve gone.”

“But Mr. Par­ry,” said Lyra, “how do you know our dae­mons have gone in­to my fa­ther’s world?”

“I was a shaman when I was alive. I learned how to see things. Ask your alethiome­ter, it’ll con­firm what I say. But re­mem­ber this about dae­mons,” he said, and his voice was in­tense and em­phat­ic. “The man you knew as Sir Charles La­trom had to re­turn to his own world pe­ri­od­ical­ly; he could not live per­ma­nent­ly in mine. The philoso­phers of the Guild of the Torre degli An­geli, who trav­eled be­tween worlds for three hun­dred years or more, found the same thing to he true, and grad­ual­ly their world weak­ened and de­cayed as a re­sult.

“And then there is what hap­pened to me. I was a sol­di­er; I was an of­fi­cer in the Marines, and then I earned my liv­ing as an ex­plor­er; I was as fit and healthy as it’s pos­si­ble for a hu­man to be. Then I walked out of my own world by ac­ci­dent, and couldn’t find the way back. I did many things and learned a great deal in the world I found my­self in, but ten years af­ter I ar­rived there, I was mor­tal­ly sick.

“And this is the rea­son for all those things: your dae­mon can on­ly live its full life in the world it was born in. Else­where it will even­tu­al­ly sick­en and die. We can trav­el, if there are open­in­gs in­to oth­er worlds, but we can on­ly live in our own. Lord As­riel’s great en­ter­prise will fail in the end for the same rea­son: we have to build the Re­pub­lic of Heav­en where we are, be­cause for us there is no else­where.

“Will, my boy, you and Lyra can go out now for a brief rest; you need that, and you de­serve it; but then you must come back in­to the dark with me and Mr. Scores­by for one last jour­ney.”

Will and Lyra ex­changed a look. Then he cut a win­dow, and it was the sweet­est thing they had ev­er seen.

The night air filled their lungs, fresh and clean and cool; their eyes took in a canopy of daz­zling stars, and the shine of wa­ter some­where be­low, and here and there groves of great trees, as high as cas­tles, dot­ting the wide sa­van­na.

Will en­larged the win­dow as wide as he could, mov­ing across the grass to left and right, mak­ing it big enough for six, sev­en, eight to walk through abreast, out of the land of the dead.

The first ghosts trem­bled with hope, and their ex­cite­ment passed back like a rip­ple over the long line be­hind them, young chil­dren and aged par­ents alike look­ing up and ahead with de­light and won­der as the first stars they had seen for cen­turies shone through in­to their poor starved eyes.

The first ghost to leave the world of the dead was Roger. He took a step for­ward, and turned to look back at Lyra, and laughed in sur­prise as he found him­self turn­ing in­to the night, the starlight, the air… and then he was gone, leav­ing be­hind such a vivid lit­tle burst of hap­pi­ness that Will was re­mind­ed of the bub­bles in a glass of cham­pagne.

The oth­er ghosts fol­lowed Roger, and Will and Lyra fell ex­haust­ed on the dewladen grass, ev­ery nerve in their bod­ies bless­ing the sweet­ness of the good soil, the night air, the stars.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-SEVEN - THE PLATFORM


Once the mule­fa be­gan to build the plat­form for Mary, they worked quick­ly and well. She en­joyed watch­ing them, be­cause they could dis­cuss with­out quar­rel­ing and co­op­er­ate with­out get­ting in each oth­er’s way, and be­cause their tech­niques of split­ting and cut­ting and join­ing wood were so el­egant and ef­fec­tive.

With­in two days the ob­ser­va­tion plat­form was de­signed and built and lift­ed in­to place. It was firm and spa­cious and com­fort­able, and when she had climbed up to it, she was as hap­py, in one way, as she had ev­er been. That one way was phys­ical­ly. In the dense green of the canopy, with the rich blue of the sky be­tween the leaves; with a breeze keep­ing her skin cool, and the faint scent of the flow­ers de­light­ing her when­ev­er she sensed it; with the rus­tle of the leaves, the song of the hun­dreds of birds, and the dis­tant mur­mur of the waves on the seashore, all her sens­es were lulled and nur­tured, and if she could have stopped think­ing, she would have been en­tire­ly lapped in bliss.

But of course think­ing was what she was there for.

And when she looked through her spy­glass and saw the re­lent­less out­ward drift of the sraf, the shad­ow par­ti­cles, it seemed to her as if hap­pi­ness and life and hope were drift­ing away with them. She could find no ex­pla­na­tion at all.

Three hun­dred years, the mule­fa had said: that was how long the trees had been fail­ing. Giv­en that the shad­ow par­ti­cles passed through all the worlds alike, pre­sum­ably the same thing was hap­pen­ing in her uni­verse, too, and in ev­ery oth­er one. Three hun­dred years ago, the Roy­al So­ci­ety was set up: the first true sci­en­tif­ic so­ci­ety in her world. New­ton was mak­ing his dis­cov­er­ies about op­tics and grav­ita­tion.

Three hun­dred years ago in Lyra’s world, some­one in­vent­ed the alethiome­ter.

At the same time in that strange world through which she’d come to get here, the sub­tle knife was in­vent­ed.

She lay back on the planks, feel­ing the plat­form move in a very slight, very slow rhythm as the great tree swayed in the sea breeze. Hold­ing the spy­glass to her eye, she watched the myr­iad tiny sparkles drift through the leaves, past the open mouths of the blos­soms, through the mas­sive boughs, mov­ing against the wind, in a slow, de­lib­er­ate cur­rent that looked all but con­scious.

What had hap­pened three hun­dred years ago? Was it the cause of the Dust cur­rent, or was it the oth­er way around? Or were they both the re­sults of a dif­fer­ent cause al­to­geth­er? Or were they sim­ply not con­nect­ed at all?

The drift was mes­mer­iz­ing. How easy it would be to fall in­to a trance, and let her mind drift away with the float­ing par­ti­cles…

Be­fore she knew what she was do­ing, and be­cause her body was lulled, that was ex­act­ly what hap­pened. She sud­den­ly snapped awake to find her­self out­side her body, and she pan­icked.

She was a lit­tle way above the plat­form, and a few feet off among the branch­es. And some­thing had hap­pened to the Dust wind: in­stead of that slow drift, it was rac­ing like a riv­er in flood. Had it sped up, or was time mov­ing dif­fer­ent­ly for her, now that she was out­side her body? Ei­ther way she was con­scious of the most hor­ri­ble dan­ger, be­cause the flood was threat­en­ing to sweep her loose com­plete­ly, and it was im­mense.

She flung out her arms to seize hold of any­thing sol­id, but she had no arms. Noth­ing con­nect­ed. Now she was al­most over that abom­in­able drop, and her body was far­ther and far­ther from reach, sleep­ing so hog­gish­ly be­low her. She tried to shout and wake her­self up: not a sound. The body slum­bered on, and the self that ob­served was be­ing borne away out of the canopy of leaves al­to­geth­er and in­to the open sky.

And no mat­ter how she strug­gled, she could make no head­way. The force that car­ried her out was as smooth and pow­er­ful as wa­ter pour­ing over a weir; the par­ti­cles of Dust were stream­ing along as if they, too, were pour­ing over some in­vis­ible edge.

And car­ry­ing her away from her body.

She flung a men­tal life­line to that phys­ical self, and tried to re­call the feel­ing of be­ing in it: all the sen­sa­tions that made up be­ing alive. The ex­act touch of her friend Atal’s soft­tipped trunk ca­ress­ing her neck. The taste of ba­con and eggs. The tri­umphant strain in her mus­cles as she pulled her­self up a rock face. The del­icate danc­ing of her fin­gers on a com­put­er key­board. The smell of roast­ing cof­fee. The warmth of her bed on a win­ter night.

And grad­ual­ly she stopped mov­ing; the life­line held fast, and she felt the weight and strength of the cur­rent push­ing against her as she hung there in the sky.

And then a strange thing hap­pened. Lit­tle by lit­tle (as she re­in­forced those sense­mem­ories, adding oth­ers, tast­ing an iced mar­gari­ta in Cal­ifor­nia, sit­ting un­der the lemon trees out­side a restau­rant in Lis­bon, scrap­ing the frost off the wind­shield of her car), she felt the Dust wind eas­ing. The pres­sure was less­en­ing.

But on­ly on her: all around, above and be­low, the great flood was stream­ing as fast as ev­er. Some­how there was a lit­tle patch of still­ness around her, where the par­ti­cles were re­sist­ing the flow.

They were con­scious! They felt her anx­iety and re­spond­ed to it. And they be­gan to car­ry her back to her de­sert­ed body, and when she was close enough to see it once more, so heavy, so warm, so safe, a silent sob con­vulsed her heart.

And then she sank back in­to her body and awoke.

She took in a shud­der­ing deep breath. She pressed her hands and her legs against the rough planks of the plat­form, and hav­ing a minute ago near­ly gone mad with fear, she was now suf­fused with a deep, slow ec­sta­sy at be­ing one with her body and the earth and ev­ery­thing that was mat­ter.

Fi­nal­ly she sat up and tried to take stock. Her fin­gers found the spy­glass, and she held it to her eye, sup­port­ing one trem­bling hand with the oth­er. There was no doubt about it: that slow sky­wide drift had be­come a flood. There was noth­ing to hear and noth­ing to feel, and with­out the spy­glass, noth­ing to see, but even when she took the glass from her eye, the sense of that swift, silent in­un­da­tion re­mained vivid­ly, to­geth­er with some­thing she hadn’t no­ticed in the ter­ror of be­ing out­side her body: the pro­found, help­less re­gret that was abroad in the air.

The shad­ow par­ti­cles knew what was hap­pen­ing and were sor­row­ful.

And she her­self was part­ly shad­ow mat­ter. Part of her was sub­ject to this tide that was mov­ing through the cos­mos. And so were the mule­fa, and so were hu­man be­in­gs in ev­ery world, and ev­ery kind of con­scious crea­ture, wher­ev­er they were.

And un­less she found out what was hap­pen­ing, they might all find them­selves drift­ing away to obliv­ion, ev­ery­one.

Sud­den­ly she longed for the earth again. She put the spy­glass in her pock­et and be­gan the long climb down to the ground.

Fa­ther Gomez stepped through the win­dow as the evening light length­ened and mel­lowed. He saw the great stands of wheel trees and the roads lac­ing through the prairie, just as Mary had done from the same spot some­time be­fore. But the air was free of haze, for it had rained a lit­tle ear­li­er, and he could see far­ther than she had; in par­tic­ular, he could see the glim­mer of a dis­tant sea and some flick­er­ing white shapes that might be sails.

He lift­ed the ruck­sack high­er on his shoul­ders and turned to­ward them to see what he could find. In the calm of the long evening, it was pleas­ant to walk on this smooth road, with the sound of some ci­ca­da­like crea­tures in the long grass and the set­ting sun warm in his face. The air was fresh, too, clear and sweet and en­tire­ly free of the taint of naph­tha fumes, kerosene fumes, what­ev­er they were, which had lain so heav­ily on the air in one of the worlds he’d passed through: the world his tar­get, the tempter her­self, be­longed to.

He came out at sun­set on a lit­tle head­land be­side a shal­low bay. If they had tides in this sea, the tide was high, be­cause there was on­ly a nar­row fringe of soft white sand above the wa­ter.

And float­ing in the calm bay were a dozen or more. Fa­ther Gomez had to stop and think care­ful­ly. A dozen or more enor­mous snowwhite birds, each the size of a row­boat, with long, straight wings that trailed on the wa­ter be­hind them: very long wings, at least two yards in length. Were they birds? They had feath­ers, and heads and beaks not un­like swans’, but those wings were sit­uat­ed one in front of the oth­er, sure­ly…

Sud­den­ly they saw him. Heads turned with a snap, and at once all those wings were raised high, ex­act­ly like the sails of a yacht, and they all leaned in with the breeze, mak­ing for the shore.

Fa­ther Gomez was im­pressed by the beau­ty of those wing­sails, by how they were flexed and trimmed so per­fect­ly, and by the speed of the birds. Then he saw that they were pad­dling, too: they had legs un­der the wa­ter, placed not fore and aft like the wings but side by side, and with the wings and the legs to­geth­er, they had an ex­traor­di­nary speed and grace in the wa­ter.

As the first one reached the shore, it lum­bered up through the dry sand, mak­ing di­rect­ly for the priest. It was hiss­ing with mal­ice, stab­bing its head for­ward as it wad­dled heav­ily up the shore, and the beak snapped and clacked. There were teeth in the beak, too, like a se­ries of sharp in­curved hooks.

Fa­ther Gomez was about a hun­dred yards from the edge of the wa­ter, on a low grassy promon­to­ry, and he had plen­ty of time to put down his ruck­sack, take out the ri­fle, load, aim, and fire.

The bird’s head ex­plod­ed in a mist of red and white, and the crea­ture blun­dered on clum­si­ly for sev­er­al steps be­fore sink­ing on­to its breast. It didn’t die for a minute or more; the legs kicked, the wings rose and fell, and the great bird beat it­self around and around in a bloody cir­cle, kick­ing up the rough grass, un­til a long, bub­bling ex­pi­ra­tion from its lungs end­ed with a cough­ing spray of red, and it fell still.

The oth­er birds had stopped as soon as the first one fell, and stood watch­ing it, and watch­ing the man, too. There was a quick, fe­ro­cious in­tel­li­gence in their eyes. They looked from him to the dead bird, from that to the ri­fle, from the ri­fle to his face.

He raised the ri­fle to his shoul­der again and saw them re­act, shift­ing back­ward clum­si­ly, crowd­ing to­geth­er. They un­der­stood.

They were fine, strong crea­tures, large and broad­backed, like liv­ing boats, in fact. If they knew what death was, thought Fa­ther Gomez, and if they could see the con­nec­tion be­tween death and him­self, then there was the ba­sis of a fruit­ful un­der­stand­ing be­tween them. Once they had tru­ly learned to fear him, they would do ex­act­ly as he said.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-EIGHT - MIDNIGHT


Lord As­riel said, “Marisa, wake up. We’re about to land.”

A blus­tery dawn was break­ing over the basalt fortress as the in­ten­tion craft flew in from the south. Mrs. Coul­ter, sore and heart­sick, opened her eyes; she had not been asleep. She could see the an­gel Xapha­nia glid­ing above the land­ing ground, and then ris­ing and wheel­ing up to the tow­er as the craft made for the ram­parts.

As soon as the craft had land­ed, Lord As­riel leapt out and ran to join King Ogun­we on the west­ern watch­tow­er, ig­nor­ing Mrs. Coul­ter en­tire­ly. The tech­ni­cians who came at once to at­tend to the fly­ing ma­chine took no no­tice of her, ei­ther; no one ques­tioned her about the loss of the air­craft she’d stolen; it was as if she’d be­come in­vis­ible. She made her way sad­ly up to the room in the adamant tow­er, where the or­der­ly of­fered to bring her some food and cof­fee.

“What­ev­er you have,” she said. “And thank you. Oh, by the way,” she went on as the man turned to go: “Lord As­riel’s alethiometrist, Mr. …”

“Mr. Basilides?”

“Yes. Is he free to come here for a mo­ment?”

“He’s work­ing with his books at the mo­ment, ma’am. I’ll ask him to step up here when he can.”

She washed and changed in­to the one clean shirt she had left. The cold wind that shook the win­dows and the gray morn­ing light made her shiv­er. She put some more coals on the iron stove, hop­ing it would stop her trem­bling, but the cold was in her bones, not just her flesh.

Ten min­utes lat­er there was a knock on the door. The pale, dark­eyed alethiometrist, with his night­in­gale dae­mon on his shoul­der, came in and bowed slight­ly. A mo­ment lat­er the or­der­ly ar­rived with a tray of bread, cheese, and cof­fee, and Mrs. Coul­ter said:

“Thank you for com­ing, Mr. Basilides. May I of­fer you some re­fresh­ment?”

“I will take some cof­fee, thank you.”

“Please tell me,” she said as soon as she’d poured the drink, “be­cause I’m sure you’ve been fol­low­ing what’s hap­pened: is my daugh­ter alive?”

He hes­itat­ed. The gold­en mon­key clutched her arm,

“She is alive,” said Basilides care­ful­ly, “but al­so…”

“Yes? Oh, please, what do you mean?”

“She is in the world of the dead. For some time I could not in­ter­pret what the in­stru­ment was telling me: it seemed im­pos­si­ble. But there is no doubt. She and the boy have gone in­to the world of the dead, and they have opened a way for the ghosts to come out. As soon as the dead reach the open, they dis­solve as their dae­mons did, and it seems that this is the most sweet and de­sir­able end for them. And the alethiome­ter tells me that the girl did this be­cause she over­heard a prophe­cy that there would come an end to death, and she thought that this was a task for her to ac­com­plish. As a re­sult, there is now a way out of the world of the dead.”

Mrs. Coul­ter couldn’t speak. She had to turn away and go to the win­dow to con­ceal the emo­tion on her face. Fi­nal­ly she said:

“And will she come out alive?, But no, I know you can’t pre­dict. Is she, how is she, has she…”

“She is suf­fer­ing, she is in pain, she is afraid. But she has the com­pan­ion­ship of the boy, and of the two Gal­livespi­an spies, and they are still all to­geth­er.”

“And the bomb?”

“The bomb did not hurt her.”

Mrs. Coul­ter felt sud­den­ly ex­haust­ed. She want­ed noth­ing more than to lie down and sleep for months, for years. Out­side, the flag rope snapped and clat­tered in the wind, and the rooks cawed as they wheeled around the ram­parts.

“Thank you, sir,” she said, turn­ing back to the read­er. “I’m very grate­ful. Please would you let me know if you dis­cov­er any­thing more about her, or where she is, or what she’s do­ing?”

The man bowed and left. Mrs. Coul­ter went to lie down on the camp bed, but try as she would, she couldn’t keep her eyes closed.

“What do you make of that, King?” said Lord As­riel.

He was look­ing through the watch­tow­er tele­scope at some­thing in the west­ern sky. It had the ap­pear­an­ce of a moun­tain hang­ing in the sky a hand’s breadth above the hori­zon, and cov­ered in cloud. It was a very long way off, so far, in fact, that it was no big­ger than a thumb­nail held out at arm’s length. But it had not been there for long, and it hung there ab­so­lute­ly still.

The tele­scope brought it clos­er, but there was no more de­tail: cloud still looks like cloud how­ev­er much it’s mag­ni­fied.

“The Cloud­ed Moun­tain,” said Ogun­we. “Or, what do they call it? The Char­iot?”

“With the Re­gent at the reins. He’s con­cealed him­self well, this Meta­tron. They speak of him in the apoc­ryphal scrip­tures: he was a man once, a man called Enoch, the son of Jared, six gen­er­ations away from Adam. And now he rules the King­dom. And he’s in­tend­ing to do more than that, if that an­gel they found by the sul­phur lake was cor­rect, the one who en­tered the Cloud­ed Moun­tain to spy. If he wins this bat­tle, he in­tends to in­ter­vene di­rect­ly in hu­man life. Imag­ine that, Ogun­we, a per­ma­nent In­qui­si­tion, worse than any­thing the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline could dream up, staffed by spies and traitors in ev­ery world and di­rect­ed per­son­al­ly by the in­tel­li­gence that’s keep­ing that moun­tain aloft…The old Au­thor­ity at least had the grace to with­draw; the dirty work of burn­ing heretics and hang­ing witch­es was left to his priests. This new one will be far, far worse.”

“Well, he’s be­gun by in­vad­ing the Re­pub­lic,” said Ogun­we. “Look, is that smoke?”

A drift of gray was leav­ing the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, a slow­ly spread­ing smudge against the blue sky. But it couldn’t have been smoke: it was drift­ing against the wind that tore at the clouds.

The king put his field glass­es to his eyes and saw what it was. “An­gels,” he said.

Lord As­riel came away from the tele­scope and stood up, hand shad­ing his eyes. In hun­dreds, and then thou­sands, and tens of thou­sands, un­til half that part of the sky was dark­ened, the minute fig­ures flew and flew and kept on com­ing. Lord As­riel had seen the bil­li­on­strong flocks of blue star­lings that wheeled at sun­set around the palace of the Em­per­or K’angPo, but he had nev­er seen so vast a mul­ti­tude in all his life. The fly­ing be­in­gs gath­ered them­selves and then streamed away slow­ly, slow­ly, to the north and the south.

“Ah! And what’s that?” said Lord As­riel, point­ing. “That’s not the wind.”

The cloud was swirling on the south­ern flank of the moun­tain, and long tat­tered ban­ners of va­por streamed out in the pow­er­ful winds. But Lord As­riel was right: the move­ment was com­ing from with­in, not from the air out­side. The cloud roiled and tum­bled, and then it part­ed for a sec­ond.

There was more than a moun­tain there, but they on­ly saw it for a mo­ment; and then the cloud swirled back, as if drawn across by an un­seen hand, to con­ceal it again.

King Ogun­we put down his field glass­es.

“That’s not a moun­tain,” he said. “I saw gun em­place­ments …”

“So did I. A whole com­plex­ity of things. Can he see out through the cloud, I won­der? In some worlds, they have ma­chines to do that. But as for his army, if those an­gels are all they’ve got…

The king gave a brief ex­cla­ma­tion, half of as­ton­ish­ment, half of de­spair. Lord As­riel turned and gripped his arm with fin­gers that all but bruised him to the bone.

“They haven’t got this!” he said, and shook Ogun­we’s arm vi­olent­ly. “They haven’t got Zesh!”

He laid his hand against his friend’s rough cheek.

“Few as we are,” he went on, “and short­lived as we are, and weak­sight­ed as we are, in com­par­ison with them, we’re still stronger. They en­vy us, Ogun­we! That’s what fu­els their ha­tred, I’m sure of it. They long to have our pre­cious bod­ies, so sol­id and pow­er­ful, so welladapt­ed to the good earth! And if we drive at them with force and de­ter­mi­na­tion, we can sweep aside those in­fi­nite num­bers as you can sweep your hand through mist. They have no more pow­er than that!”

“As­riel, they have al­lies from a thou­sand worlds, liv­ing be­in­gs like us.”

“We shall win.”

“And sup­pose he’s sent those an­gels to look for your daugh­ter?”

“My daugh­ter!” cried Lord As­riel, ex­ult­ing. “Isn’t it some­thing to bring a child like that in­to the world? You’d think it was enough to go alone to the king of the ar­mored bears and trick his king­dom out of his paws, but to go down in­to the world of the dead and calm­ly let them all out! And that boy; I want to meet that boy; I want to shake his hand. Did we know what we were tak­ing on when we start­ed this re­bel­li­on? No. But did they know, the Au­thor­ity and his Re­gent, this Meta­tron, did they know what they were tak­ing on when my daugh­ter got in­volved?”

“Lord As­riel,” said the king, “do you un­der­stand her im­por­tance for the fu­ture?”

“Frankly, no. That’s why I want to see Basilides. Where did he go?”

“To the La­dy Coul­ter. But the man is worn out; he can do no more un­til he’s rest­ed.”

“He should have rest­ed be­fore. Send for him, would you? Oh, one more thing: please ask Madame Ox­en­tiel to come to the tow­er as soon as it’s con­ve­nient. I must give her my con­do­lences.”

Madame Ox­en­tiel had been the Gal­livespi­ans’ sec­ond­in­com­mand. Now she would have to take over Lord Roke’s re­spon­si­bil­ities. King Ogun­we bowed and left his com­man­der scan­ning the gray hori­zon.

All through that day the army as­sem­bled. An­gels of Lord As­riel’s force flew high over the Cloud­ed Moun­tain, look­ing for an open­ing, but with­out suc­cess. Noth­ing changed; no more an­gels flew out or in­ward; the high winds tore at the clouds, and the clouds end­less­ly re­newed them­selves, not part­ing even for a sec­ond. The sun crossed the cold blue sky and then moved down to the south­west, gild­ing the clouds and tint­ing the va­por around the moun­tain ev­ery shade of cream and scar­let, of apri­cot and or­ange. When the sun sank, the clouds glowed faint­ly from with­in.

War­ri­ors were now in place from ev­ery world where Lord As­riel’s re­bel­li­on had sup­port­ers; me­chan­ics and ar­ti­fi­cers were fu­el­ing air­craft, load­ing weapons, and cal­ibrat­ing sights and mea­sures. As the dark­ness came, some wel­come re­in­force­ments ar­rived. Padding silent­ly over the cold ground from the north, sep­arate­ly, singly, came a num­ber of ar­mored hears, a large num­ber, and among them was their king. Not long af­ter­ward, there ar­rived the first of sev­er­al witch clans, the sound of the air through their pine branch­es whis­per­ing in the dark sky for a long time.

Along the plain to the south of the fortress glim­mered thou­sands of lights, mark­ing the camps of those who had ar­rived from far off. Far­ther away, in all four cor­ners of the com­pass, flights of spyan­gels cruised tire­less­ly, keep­ing watch.

At mid­night in the adamant tow­er, Lord As­riel sat in dis­cus­sion with King Ogun­we, the an­gel Xapha­nia, Madame Ox­en­tiel the Gal­livespi­an, and Teukros Basilides. The alethiometrist had just fin­ished speak­ing, and Lord As­riel stood up, crossed to the win­dow, and looked out at the dis­tant glow of the Cloud­ed Moun­tain hang­ing in the west­ern sky. The oth­ers were silent; they had just heard some­thing that had made Lord As­riel turn pale and trem­ble, and none of them quite knew how to re­spond.

Fi­nal­ly Lord As­riel spoke.

“Mr. Basilides,” he said, “you must be very fa­tigued. I am grate­ful for all your ef­forts. Please take some wine with us.”

“Thank you, my lord,” said the read­er.

His hands were shak­ing. King Ogun­we poured the gold­en Tokay and hand­ed him the glass.

“What will this mean, Lord As­riel?” said the clear voice of Madame Ox­en­tiel.

Lord As­riel came back to the ta­ble.

“Well,” he said, “it will mean that when we join bat­tle, we shall have a new ob­jec­tive. My daugh­ter and this boy have be­come sep­arat­ed from their dae­mons, some­how, and man­aged to sur­vive; and their dae­mons are some­where in this world, cor­rect me if I’m sum­ma­riz­ing wrong­ly, Mr. Basilides, their dae­mons are in this world, and Meta­tron is in­tent on cap­tur­ing them. If he cap­tures their dae­mons, the chil­dren will have to fol­low; and if he can con­trol those two chil­dren, the fu­ture is his, for­ev­er. Our task is clear: we have to find the dae­mons be­fore he does, and keep them safe till the girl and the boy re­join them.”

The Gal­livespi­an lead­er said, “What form do they have, these two lost dae­mons?”

“They are not yet fixed, madame,” said Teukros Basilides. “They might be any shape.”

“So,” said Lord As­riel, “to sum it up: all of us, our Re­pub­lic, the fu­ture of ev­ery con­scious be­ing, we all de­pend on my daugh­ter’s re­main­ing alive, and on keep­ing her dae­mon and the boy’s out of the hands of Meta­tron?”

“That is so.”

Lord As­riel sighed, al­most with sat­is­fac­tion; it was as if he’d come to the end of a long and com­plex cal­cu­la­tion, and reached an an­swer that made quite un­ex­pect­ed sense.

“Very well,” he said, spread­ing his hands wide on the ta­ble. “Then this is what we shall do when the bat­tle be­gins. King Ogun­we, you will as­sume com­mand of all the armies de­fend­ing the fortress. Madame Ox­en­tiel, you are to send your peo­ple out at once to search in ev­ery di­rec­tion for the girl and the boy, and the two dae­mons. When you find them, guard them with your lives un­til they come to­geth­er again. At that point, I un­der­stand, the boy will be able to help them es­cape to an­oth­er world, and safe­ty.”

The la­dy nod­ded. Her stiff gray hair caught the lamp­light, glint­ing like stain­less steel, and the blue hawk she had in­her­it­ed from Lord Roke spread his wings briefly on the brack­et by the door.

“Now, Xapha­nia,” said Lord As­riel. “What do you know of this Meta­tron? He was once a man: does he still have the phys­ical strength of a hu­man be­ing?”

“He came to pro­mi­nence long af­ter I was ex­iled,” the an­gel said. “I have nev­er seen him up close. But he would not have been able to dom­inate the King­dom un­less he was very strong in­deed, strong in ev­ery way. Most an­gels would avoid fight­ing hand­to­hand. Meta­tron would rel­ish the com­bat, and win.”

Ogun­we could tell that Lord As­riel had been struck by an idea. His at­ten­tion sud­den­ly with­drew, his eyes lost fo­cus for an in­stant, and then snapped back to the mo­ment with an ex­tra charge of in­ten­si­ty.

“I see,” he said. “Fi­nal­ly, Xapha­nia, Mr. Basilides tells us that their bomb not on­ly opened an abyss be­low the worlds, but al­so frac­tured the struc­ture of things so pro­found­ly that there are fis­sures and cracks ev­ery­where. Some­where near­by there must be a way down to the edge of that abyss. I want you to look for it.”

“What are you go­ing to do?” said King Ogun­we harsh­ly.

“I’m go­ing to de­stroy Meta­tron. But my part is near­ly over. It’s my daugh­ter who has to live, and it’s our task to keep all the forces of the King­dom away from her so that she has a chance to find her way to a safer world, she and that boy, and their dae­mons.”

“And what about Mrs. Coul­ter?” said the king.

Lord As­riel passed a hand over his fore­head.

“I would not have her trou­bled,” he said. “Leave her alone and pro­tect her if you can. Al­though… Well, maybe I’m do­ing her an in­jus­tice. What­ev­er else she’s done, she’s nev­er failed to sur­prise me. But we all know what we must do, and why we must do it: we have to pro­tect Lyra un­til she has found her dae­mon and es­caped. Our Re­pub­lic might have come in­to be­ing for the sole pur­pose of help­ing her do that. Let us do it as well as we can.”

Mrs. Coul­ter lay in Lord As­riel’s bed next door. Hear­ing voic­es in the oth­er room, she stirred, for she wasn’t deeply asleep. She came out of her trou­bled slum­ber un­easy and heavy with long­ing.

Her dae­mon sat up be­side her, but she didn’t want to move clos­er to the door; it was sim­ply the sound of Lord As­riel’s voice she want­ed to hear rather than any par­tic­ular words. She thought they were both doomed. She thought they were all doomed.

Fi­nal­ly she heard the door clos­ing in the oth­er room and roused her­self to stand up.

“As­riel,” she said, go­ing through in­to the warm naph­tha light.

His dae­mon growled soft­ly; the gold­en mon­key dropped his head low to pro­pi­ti­ate her. Lord As­riel was rolling up a large map and did not turn.

“As­riel, what will hap­pen to us all?” she said, tak­ing a chair.

He pressed the heels of his hands in­to his eyes. His face was rav­aged with fa­tigue. He sat down and rest­ed an el­bow on the ta­ble. Their dae­mons were very still, the mon­key crouch­ing on the chair back, the snow leop­ard sit­ting up­right and alert at Lord As­riel’s side, watch­ing Mrs. Coul­ter un­blink­ing­ly.

“You didn’t hear?” he said.

“I heard a lit­tle. I couldn’t sleep, but I wasn’t lis­ten­ing. Where is Lyra now, does any­one know?”

“No.”

He still hadn’t an­swered her first ques­tion, and he wasn’t go­ing to, and she knew it.

“We should have mar­ried,” she said, “and brought her up our­selves.”

It was such an un­ex­pect­ed re­mark that he blinked. His dae­mon ut­tered the soft­est pos­si­ble growl at the back of her throat, and set­tled down with her paws out­stretched in the man­ner of the Sphinx. He said noth­ing.

“I can’t hear the thought of obliv­ion, As­riel,” she con­tin­ued. “Soon­er any­thing than that. I used to think pain would he worse, to be tor­tured for­ev­er, I thought that must he worse… But as long as you were con­scious, it would be bet­ter, wouldn’t it? Bet­ter than feel­ing noth­ing, just go­ing in­to the dark, ev­ery­thing go­ing out for­ev­er and ev­er?”

His part was sim­ply to lis­ten. His eyes were locked on hers, and he was pay­ing pro­found at­ten­tion; there was no need to re­spond. She said:

“The oth­er day, when you spoke about her so bit­ter­ly, and about me… I thought you hat­ed her. I could un­der­stand your hat­ing me. I’ve nev­er hat­ed you, but I could un­der­stand… I could see why you might hate me. But I couldn’t see why you hat­ed Lyra.”

He turned his head away slow­ly, and then looked back.

“I re­mem­ber you said some­thing strange, on Sval­bard, on the moun­tain­top, just be­fore you left our world,” she went on. “You said: Come with me, and we’ll de­stroy Dust for­ev­er. You re­mem­ber say­ing that? But you didn’t mean it. You meant the very op­po­site, didn’t you? I see now. Why didn’t you tell me what you were re­al­ly do­ing? Why didn’t you tell me you were re­al­ly try­ing to pre­serve Dust? You could have told me the truth.”

“I want­ed you to come and join me,” he said, his voice hoarse and qui­et, “and I thought you would pre­fer a lie.”

“Yes,” she whis­pered, “that’s what I thought.”

She couldn’t sit still, but she didn’t re­al­ly have the strength to stand up. For a mo­ment she felt faint, her head swam, sounds re­ced­ed, the room dark­ened, but al­most at once her sens­es came back even more piti­less­ly than be­fore, and noth­ing in the sit­ua­tion had changed.

“As­riel…” she mur­mured.

The gold­en mon­key put a ten­ta­tive hand out to touch the paw of the snow leop­ard. The man watched with­out a word, and Stel­maria didn’t move; her eyes were fixed on Mrs. Coul­ter.

“Oh, As­riel, what will hap­pen to us?” Mrs. Coul­ter said again. “Is this the end of ev­ery­thing?”

He said noth­ing.

Mov­ing like some­one in a dream, she got to her feet, picked up the ruck­sack that lay in the cor­ner of the room, and reached in­side it for her pis­tol; and what she would have done next, no one knew, be­cause at that mo­ment there came the sound of foot­steps run­ning up the stairs.

Both man and wom­an, and both dae­mons, turned to look at the or­der­ly who came in and said breath­less­ly:

“Ex­cuse me, my lord, the two dae­mons, they’ve been seen, not far from the east­ern gate, in the form of cats, the sen­try tried to talk to them, bring them in­side, but they wouldn’t come near. It was on­ly a minute or so ago…”

Lord As­riel sat up, trans­fig­ured. All the fa­tigue had been wiped off his face in a mo­ment. He sprang to his feet and seized his great­coat.

Ig­nor­ing Mrs. Coul­ter, he flung the coat around his shoul­ders and said to the or­der­ly:

“Tell Madame Ox­en­tiel at once. Put this or­der out: the dae­mons are not to be threat­ened, or fright­ened, or co­erced in any way. Any­one see­ing them should first…”

Mrs. Coul­ter heard no more of what he was say­ing, be­cause he was al­ready halfway down the stairs. When his run­ning foot­steps had fad­ed, too, the on­ly sounds were the gen­tle hiss of the naph­tha lamp and the moan of the wild wind out­side.

Her eyes found the eyes of her dae­mon. The gold­en mon­key’s ex­pres­sion was as sub­tle and com­plex as it had ev­er been in all their thir­ty­five years of life.

“Very well,” she said. “I can’t see any oth­er way. I think… I think we’ll…”

He knew at once what she meant. He leapt to her breast, and they em­braced. Then she found her furlined coat, and they very qui­et­ly left the cham­ber and made their way down the dark stairs.





The Amber Spyglass





TWENTY-NINE - THE BATTLE ON THE PLAIN


It was des­per­ate­ly hard for Lyra and Will to leave that sweet world where they had slept the night be­fore, but if they were ev­er go­ing to find their dae­mons, they knew they had to go in­to the dark once more. And now, af­ter hours of weary crawl­ing through the dim tun­nel, Lyra bent over the alethiome­ter for the twen­ti­eth time, mak­ing lit­tle un­con­scious sounds of dis­tress, whim­pers and catch­es of breath that would have been sobs if they were any stronger. Will, too, felt the pain where his dae­mon had been, a scald­ed place of acute ten­der­ness that ev­ery breath tore at with cold hooks.

How weari­ly Lyra turned the wheels; on what lead­en feet her thoughts moved. The lad­ders of mean­ing that led from ev­ery one of the alethiome­ter’s thir­tysix sym­bols, down which she used to move so light­ly and con­fi­dent­ly, felt loose and shaky. And hold­ing the con­nec­tions be­tween them in her mind…It had once been like run­ning, or singing, or telling a sto­ry: some­thing nat­ural. Now she had to do it la­bo­ri­ous­ly, and her grip was fail­ing, and she mustn’t fail be­cause oth­er­wise ev­ery­thing would fail…

“It’s not far,” she said at last. “And there’s all kinds of dan­ger, there’s a bat­tle, there’s.. .But we’re near­ly in the right place now. Just at the end of this tun­nel there’s a big smooth rock run­ning with wa­ter. You cut through there.”

The ghosts who were go­ing to fight pressed for­ward ea­ger­ly, and she felt Lee Scores­by close at her side.

He said, “Lyra, gal, it won’t be long now. When you see that old bear, you tell him Lee went out fight­ing. And when the bat­tle’s over, there’ll be all the time in the world to drift along the wind and find the atoms that used to be Hes­ter, and my moth­er in the sage­lands, and my sweet­hearts, all my sweet­hearts… Lyra, child, you rest when this is done, you hear? Life is good, and death is over…”

His voice fad­ed. She want­ed to put her arms around him, but of course that was im­pos­si­ble. So she just looked at his pale form in­stead, and the ghost saw the pas­sion and bril­liance in her eyes, and took strength from it.

And on Lyra’s shoul­der, and on Will’s, rode the two Gal­livespi­ans. Their short lives were near­ly over; each of them felt a stiff­ness in their limbs, a cold­ness around the heart. They would both re­turn soon to the world of the dead, this time as ghosts, but they caught each oth­er’s eye, and vowed that they would stay with Will and Lyra for as long as they could, and not say a word about their dy­ing.

Up and up the chil­dren clam­bered. They didn’t speak. They heard each oth­er’s harsh breath­ing, they heard their foot­falls, they heard the lit­tle stones their steps dis­lodged. Ahead of them all the way, the harpy scram­bled heav­ily, her wings drag­ging, her claws scratch­ing, silent and grim.

Then came a new sound: a reg­ular drip­drip, echo­ing in the tun­nel. And then a faster drip­ping, a trick­le, a run­ning of wa­ter.

“Here!” said Lyra, reach­ing for­ward to touch a sheet of rock that blocked the way, smooth and wet and cold. “Here it is.”

She turned to the harpy.

“I been think­ing,” she said, “how you saved me, and how you promised to guide all the oth­er ghosts that’ll come through the world of the dead to that land we slept in last night. And I thought, if you en’t got a name, that can’t be fight, not for the fu­ture. So I thought I’d give you a name, like King Iorek Byr­ni­son gave me my name Sil­ver­tongue. I’m go­ing to call you Gra­cious Wings. So that’s your name now, and that’s what you’ll be for ev­er­more: Gra­cious Wings.”

“One day,” said the harpy, “I will see you again, Lyra Sil­ver­tongue.”

“And if I know you’re here, I shan’t be afraid,” Lyra said. “Good­bye, Gra­cious Wings, till I die.”

She em­braced the harpy, hug­ging her tight­ly and kiss­ing her on both cheeks.

Then the Che­va­li­er Tialys said: “This is the world of Lord As­riel’s Re­pub­lic?”

“Yes,” she said, “that’s what the alethiome­ter says. It’s close to his fortress.”

“Then let me speak to the ghosts.”

She held him high, and he called, “Lis­ten, be­cause the La­dy Salmakia and I are the on­ly ones among us who have seen this world be­fore. There is a fortress on a moun­tain­top: that is what Lord As­riel is de­fend­ing. Who the en­emy is I do not know. Lyra and Will have on­ly one task now, which is to search for their dae­mons. Our task is to help them. Let’s be of good courage and fight well.”

Lyra turned to Will.

“All right,” he said, “I’m ready.”

He took out the knife and looked in­to the eyes of his fa­ther’s ghost, who stood close by. They wouldn’t know each oth­er for much longer, and Will thought how glad he would have been to see his moth­er be­side them as well, all three to­geth­er…

“Will,” said Lyra, alarmed.

He stopped. The knife was stuck in the air. He took his hand away, and there it hung, fas­tened in the sub­stance of an in­vis­ible world. He let out a deep breath.

“I near­ly…”

“I could see,” she said. “Look at me, Will.”

In the ghost light he saw her bright hair, her firm­set mouth, her can­did eyes; he felt the warmth of her breath; he caught the friend­ly scent of her flesh.

The knife came loose.

“I’ll try again,” he said.

He turned away. Fo­cus­ing hard, he let his mind flow down to the knife tip, touch­ing, with­draw­ing, search­ing, and then he found it. In, along, down, and back. The ghosts crowd­ed so close that Will’s body and Lyra’s felt lit­tle jolts of cold along ev­ery nerve.

And he made the fi­nal cut.

The first thing they sensed was noise. The light that struck in was daz­zling, and they had to cov­er their eyes, ghosts and liv­ing alike, so they could see noth­ing for sev­er­al sec­onds; but the pound­ing, the ex­plo­sions, the rat­tle of gun­fire, the shouts and screams were all in­stant­ly clear, and hor­ri­bly fright­en­ing.

John Par­ry’s ghost and the ghost of Lee Scores­by re­cov­ered their sens­es first. Be­cause both had been sol­diers, ex­pe­ri­enced in bat­tle, they weren’t so dis­ori­ent­ed by the noise. Will and Lyra sim­ply watched in fear and amaze­ment.

Ex­plo­sive rock­ets were burst­ing in the air above, show­er­ing frag­ments of rock and met­al over the slopes of the moun­tain, which they saw a lit­tle way off; and in the skies an­gels were fight­ing an­gels, and witch­es, too, swooped and soared scream­ing their clan cries as they shot ar­rows at their en­emies. They saw a Gal­livespi­an, mount­ed on a drag­on­fly, div­ing to at­tack a fly­ing ma­chine whose hu­man pi­lot tried to fight him off hand to hand. While the drag­on­fly dart­ed and skimmed above, its rid­er leapt off to clamp his spurs deep in the pi­lot’s neck; and then the in­sect re­turned, swoop­ing low to let its rid­er leap on the bril­liant green back as the fly­ing ma­chine droned straight in­to the rocks at the foot of the fortress.

“Open it wider,” said Lee Scores­by. “Let us out!”

“Wait, Lee,” said John Par­ry. “Some­thing’s hap­pen­ing, look over there.”

Will cut an­oth­er small win­dow in the di­rec­tion he in­di­cat­ed, and as they looked out, they could all see a change in the pat­tern of the fight­ing. The at­tack­ing force be­gan to with­draw. A group of armed ve­hi­cles stopped mov­ing for­ward, and un­der cov­er­ing fire, turned la­bo­ri­ous­ly and moved back. A squadron of fly­ing ma­chines, which had been get­ting the bet­ter of a ragged bat­tle with Lord As­riel’s gy­ropters, wheeled in the sky and made off to the west. The King­dom’s forces on the ground, columns of ri­fle­men, troops equipped with flamethrow­ers, with poi­son­spray­ing can­nons, with weapons such as none of the watch­ers had ev­er seen, be­gan to dis­en­gage and pull back.

“What’s go­ing on?” said Lee. “They’re leav­ing the field, but why?”

There seemed to be no rea­son for it: Lord As­riel’s al­lies were out­num­bered, their weapons were less po­tent, and many more of them were ly­ing wound­ed.

Then Will felt a sud­den move­ment among the ghosts. They were point­ing out at some­thing drift­ing in the air.

“Specters!” said John Par­ry. “That’s the rea­son.”

And for the first time, Will and Lyra thought they could see those things, like veils of shim­mer­ing gauze, falling from the sky like this­tle­down. But they were very faint, and when they reached the ground, they were much hard­er to see.

“What are they do­ing?” said Lyra.

“They’re mak­ing for that pla­toon of As­riel’s ri­fle­men…

And Will and Lyra knew what would hap­pen, and they both called out in fear: “Run! Get away!”

Some of the sol­diers, hear­ing chil­dren’s voic­es cry­ing out from close by, looked around star­tled. Oth­ers, see­ing a Specter mak­ing for them, so strange and blank and greedy, raised their guns and fired, but of course with no ef­fect. And then it struck the first man it came to.

He was a sol­di­er from Lyra’s own world, an African. His dae­mon was a lon­glegged tawny cat spot­ted with black, and she drew back her teeth and pre­pared to spring.

They all saw the man aim­ing his ri­fle, fear­less, not giv­ing an inch, and then they saw the dae­mon in the toils of an in­vis­ible net, snarling, howl­ing, help­less, and the man try­ing to reach to her, drop­ping his ri­fle, cry­ing her name, and sink­ing and faint­ing him­self with pain and bru­tal nau­sea.

“Right, Will,” said John Par­ry. “Let us out now; we can fight those things.”

So Will opened the win­dow wide and ran out at the head of the army of ghosts; and then be­gan the strangest bat­tle he could imag­ine.

The ghosts clam­bered out of the earth, pale forms paler still in the mid­day light. They had noth­ing to fear any­more, and they threw them­selves against the in­vis­ible Specters, grap­pling and wrestling and tear­ing at things Will and Lyra couldn’t see at all.

The ri­fle­men and the oth­er liv­ing al­lies were be­mused: they could make noth­ing of this ghost­ly, spec­tral com­bat. Will made his way through the mid­dle of it, bran­dish­ing the knife, re­mem­ber­ing how the Specters had fled from it be­fore.

Wher­ev­er he went, Lyra went, too, wish­ing she had some­thing to fight with as Will was do­ing, but look­ing around, watch­ing more wide­ly. She thought she could see the Specters from time to time, in an oily glis­ten­ing of the air; and it was Lyra who felt the first shiv­er of dan­ger.

With Salmakia on her shoul­der, she found her­self on a slight rise, just a bank of earth sur­mount­ed by hawthorn bush­es, from which she could see the great sweep of coun­try the in­vaders were lay­ing waste.

The sun was above her. Ahead, on the west­ern hori­zon, clouds lay heaped and bril­liant, riv­en with chasms of dark­ness, their tops drawn out in the high­al­ti­tude winds. That way, too, on the plain, the en­emy’s ground forces wait­ed: ma­chines glint­ing bright­ly, flags astir with col­or, reg­iments drawn up, wait­ing.

Be­hind, and to her left, was the ridge of jagged hills lead­ing up to the fortress. They shone bright gray in the lurid prestorm light, and on the dis­tant ram­parts of black basalt, she could even see lit­tle fig­ures mov­ing about, re­pair­ing the dam­aged bat­tle­ments, bring­ing more weapons to bear, or sim­ply watch­ing.

And it was about then that Lyra felt the first dis­tant lurch of nau­sea, pain, and fear that was the un­mis­tak­able touch of the Specters.

She knew what it was at once, though she’d nev­er felt it be­fore. And it told her two things: first, that she must have grown up enough now to be­come vul­ner­able to the Specters, and sec­ond­ly, that Pan must be some­where close by.

“Will, Will… she cried.

He heard her and turned, knife in hand and eyes ablaze.

But be­fore he could speak, he gave a gasp, made a chok­ing lurch, and clutched his breast, and she knew the same thing was hap­pen­ing to him.

“Pan! Pan!” she cried, stand­ing on tip­toe to look all around.

Will was bend­ing over, try­ing not to be sick. Af­ter a few mo­ments the feel­ing passed away, as if their demons had es­caped; but they were no near­er to find­ing them, and all around the air was full of gun­shots, cries, voic­es cry­ing in pain or ter­ror, the dis­tant yowky­owky­owk of clif­fghasts cir­cling over­head, the oc­ca­sion­al whiz and chock of ar­rows, and then a new sound: the ris­ing of the wind.

Lyra felt it first on her cheeks, and then she saw the grass bend­ing un­der it, and then she heard it in the hawthorns. The sky ahead was huge with storm: all the white­ness had gone from the thun­der­heads, and they rolled and swirled with sul­phur yel­low, sea green, smoke gray, oil black, a queasy churn­ing miles high and as wide as the hori­zon.

Be­hind her the sun was still shin­ing, so that ev­ery grove and ev­ery sin­gle tree be­tween her and the storm blazed ar­dent and vivid, lit­tle frail things de­fy­ing the dark with leaf and twig and fruit and flow­er.

And through it all went the two no­longerquitechil­dren, see­ing the Specters al­most clear­ly now. The wind was snap­ping at Will’s eyes and lash­ing Lyra’s hair across her face, and it should have been able to blow the Specters away; but the things drift­ed straight down through it to­ward the ground. Boy and girl, hand in hand, picked their way over the dead and the wound­ed, Lyra call­ing for her dae­mon, Will alert in ev­ery sense for his.

And now the sky was laced with light­ning, and then the first almighty crack of thun­der hit their eardrums like an ax. Lyra put her hands to her head, and Will near­ly stum­bled, as if driv­en down­ward by the sound. They clung to each oth­er and looked up, and saw a sight no one had ev­er seen be­fore in any of the mil­li­ons of worlds.

Witch­es, Ru­ta Ska­di’s clan, and Reina Mi­ti’s, and half a dozen oth­ers, ev­ery sin­gle witch car­ry­ing a torch of flar­ing pitch pine dipped in bi­tu­men, were stream­ing over the fortress from the east, from the last of the clear sky, and fly­ing straight to­ward the storm.

Those on the ground could hear the roar and crack­le as the volatile hy­dro­car­bons flamed high above. A few Specters still re­mained in the up­per airs, and some witch­es flew in­to them un­see­ing, to cry out and tum­ble blaz­ing to the ground; but most of the pal­lid things had reached the earth by this time, and the great flight of witch­es streamed like a riv­er of fire in­to the heart of the storm.

A flight of an­gels, armed with spears and swords, had emerged from the Cloud­ed Moun­tain to meet the witch­es head­on. They had the wind be­hind them, and they sped for­ward faster than ar­rows; but the witch­es were equal to that, and the first ones soared up high and then dived in­to the ranks of the an­gels, lash­ing to left and right with their flar­ing torch­es. An­gel af­ter an­gel, out­lined in fire, their wings ablaze, tum­bled scream­ing from the air.

And then the first great drops of rain came down. If the com­man­der in the storm clouds meant to douse the witch fires, he was dis­ap­point­ed; the pitch pine and the bi­tu­men blazed de­fi­an­ce at it, spit­ting and hiss­ing more loud­ly as more rain splashed in­to them. The rain­drops hit the ground as if they’d been hurled in mal­ice, break­ing and splash­ing up in­to the air. With­in a minute Lyra and Will were both soaked to the skin and shak­ing with cold, and the rain stung their heads and arms like tiny stones.

Through it all they stum­bled and strug­gled, wip­ing the wa­ter from their eyes, call­ing in the tu­mult: “Pan! Pan!”

The thun­der over­head was al­most con­stant now, rip­ping and grind­ing and crash­ing as if the very atoms were be­ing torn open. Be­tween thun­der crash and pang of fear ran Will and Lyra, howl­ing, both of them, “Pan! My Pan­ta­lai­mon! Pan!” from Lyra and a word­less cry from Will, who knew what he had lost, but not what she was named.

With them ev­ery­where went the two Gal­livespi­ans, warn­ing them to look this way, to go that way, watch­ing out for the Specters the chil­dren could still not ful­ly see. But Lyra had to hold Salmakia in her hands, be­cause the La­dy had lit­tle strength left to cling to Lyra’s shoul­der. Tialys was scan­ning the skies all around, search­ing for his kin­dred and call­ing out when­ev­er he saw a nee­dle­bright dart­ing move­ment through the air above. But his voice had lost much of its pow­er, and in any case the oth­er Gal­livespi­ans were look­ing for the clan col­ors of their two drag­on­flies, the elec­tric blue and the redandyel­low; and those col­ors had long since fad­ed, and the bod­ies that had shone with them lay in the world of the dead.

And then came a move­ment in the sky that was dif­fer­ent from the rest. As the chil­dren looked up, shel­ter­ing their eyes from the lash­ing rain­drops, they saw an air­craft un­like any they’d seen be­fore, un­gain­ly, six­legged, dark, and to­tal­ly silent. It was fly­ing low, very low, from the fortress. It skimmed over­head, no high­er than a rooftop above them, and then moved away in­to the heart of the storm.

But they had no time to won­der about it, be­cause an­oth­er head­wrench­ing throb of nau­sea told Lyra that Pan was in dan­ger again, and then Will felt it, too, and they stum­bled blind­ly through the pud­dles and the mud and the chaos of wound­ed men and fight­ing ghosts, help­less, ter­ri­fied, and sick.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY - THE CLOUDED MOUNTAIN


The in­ten­tion craft was be­ing pi­lot­ed by Mrs. Coul­ter. She and her dae­mon were alone in the cock­pit.

The baro­met­ric al­time­ter was lit­tle use in the storm, but she could judge her al­ti­tude rough­ly by watch­ing the fires on the ground that blazed where an­gels fell; de­spite the hurtling rain, they were still flar­ing high. As for the course, that wasn’t dif­fi­cult, ei­ther: the light­ning that flick­ered around the Moun­tain served as a bril­liant bea­con. But she had to avoid the var­ious fly­ing be­in­gs who were still fight­ing in the air, and keep clear of the ris­ing land be­low.

She didn’t use the lights, be­cause she want­ed to get close and find some­where to land be­fore they saw her and shot her down. As she flew clos­er, the up­drafts be­came more vi­olent, the gusts more sud­den and bru­tal. A gy­ropter would have had no chance: the sav­age air would have slammed it to the ground like a fly. In the in­ten­tion craft she could move light­ly with the wind, ad­just­ing her bal­an­ce like a wave rid­er in the Peace­able Ocean.

Cau­tious­ly she be­gan to climb, peer­ing for­ward, ig­nor­ing the in­stru­ments and fly­ing by sight and by in­stinct. Her dae­mon leapt from one side of the lit­tle glass cab­in to the oth­er, look­ing ahead, above, to the left and right, and call­ing to her con­stant­ly. The light­ning, great sheets and lances of bril­liance, flared and cracked above and around the ma­chine. Through it all she flew in the lit­tle air­craft, gain­ing height lit­tle by lit­tle, and al­ways mov­ing on to­ward the cloud­hung palace.

And as Mrs. Coul­ter ap­proached, she found her at­ten­tion daz­zled and be­wil­dered by the na­ture of the Moun­tain it­self.

It re­mind­ed her of a cer­tain abom­in­able heresy, whose au­thor was now de­served­ly lan­guish­ing in the dun­geons of the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court. He had sug­gest­ed that there were more spa­tial di­men­sions than the three fa­mil­iar ones, that on a very small scale, there were up to sev­en or eight oth­er di­men­sions, but that they were im­pos­si­ble to ex­am­ine di­rect­ly. He had even con­struct­ed a mod­el to show how they might work, and Mrs. Coul­ter had seen the ob­ject be­fore it was ex­or­cised and burned. Folds with­in folds, cor­ners and edges both con­tain­ing and be­ing con­tained: its in­side was ev­ery­where and its out­side was ev­ery­where else. The Cloud­ed Moun­tain af­fect­ed her in a sim­ilar way: it was less like a rock than like a force field, ma­nip­ulat­ing space it­self to en­fold and stretch and lay­er it in­to gal­leries and ter­races, cham­bers and colon­nades and watch­tow­ers of air and light and va­por.

She felt a strange ex­ul­ta­tion welling slow­ly in her breast, and she saw at the same time how to bring the air­craft safe­ly up to the cloud­ed ter­race on the south­ern flank. The lit­tle craft lurched and strained in the tur­bid air, but she held the course firm, and her dae­mon guid­ed her down to land on the ter­race.

The light she’d seen by till now had come from the light­ning, the oc­ca­sion­al gash­es in the cloud where the sun struck through, the fires from the burn­ing an­gels, the beams of an­bar­ic search­lights; but the light here was dif­fer­ent. It came from the sub­stance of the Moun­tain it­self, which glowed and fad­ed in a slow breath­like rhythm, with a moth­erof­pearl ra­di­an­ce.

Wom­an and dae­mon got down from the craft and looked around to see which way they should go.

She had the feel­ing that oth­er be­in­gs were mov­ing rapid­ly above and be­low, speed­ing through the sub­stance of the Moun­tain it­self with mes­sages, or­ders, in­for­ma­tion. She couldn’t see them; all she could see was con­fus­ing, in­fold­ed per­spec­tives of colon­nade, stair­case, ter­race, and fa­cade.

Be­fore she could make up her mind which way to go, she heard voic­es and with­drew be­hind a col­umn. The voic­es were singing a psalm and com­ing clos­er, and then she saw a pro­ces­sion of an­gels car­ry­ing a lit­ter.

As they neared the place where she was hid­ing, they saw the in­ten­tion craft and stopped. The singing fal­tered, and some of the bear­ers looked around in doubt and fear.

Mrs. Coul­ter was close enough to see the be­ing in the lit­ter: an an­gel, she thought, and in­de­scrib­ably aged. He wasn’t easy to see, be­cause the lit­ter was en­closed all around with crys­tal that glit­tered and threw back the en­vel­op­ing light of the Moun­tain, but she had the im­pres­sion of ter­ri­fy­ing de­crepi­tude, of a face sunken in wrin­kles, of trem­bling hands, and of a mum­bling mouth and rheumy eyes.

The aged be­ing ges­tured shak­ily at the in­ten­tion craft, and cack­led and mut­tered to him­self, pluck­ing in­ces­sant­ly at his beard, and then threw back his head and ut­tered a howl of such an­guish that Mrs. Coul­ter had to cov­er her ears.

But ev­ident­ly the bear­ers had a task to do, for they gath­ered them­selves and moved far­ther along the ter­race, ig­nor­ing the cries and mum­bles from in­side the lit­ter. When they reached an open space, they spread their wings wide, and at a word from their lead­er they be­gan to fly, car­ry­ing the lit­ter be­tween them, un­til they were lost to Mrs. Coul­ter’s sight in the swirling va­pors.

But there wasn’t time to think about that. She and the gold­en mon­key moved on quick­ly, climb­ing great stair­cas­es, cross­ing bridges, al­ways mov­ing up­ward. The high­er they went, the more they felt that sense of in­vis­ible ac­tiv­ity all around them, un­til fi­nal­ly they turned a cor­ner in­to a wide space like a mis­thung pi­az­za, and found them­selves con­front­ed by an an­gel with a spear.

“Who are you? What is your busi­ness?” he said.

Mrs. Coul­ter looked at him cu­ri­ous­ly. These were the be­in­gs who had fall­en in love with hu­man wom­en, with the daugh­ters of men, so long ago.

“No, no,” she said gen­tly, “please don’t waste time. Take me to the Re­gent at once. He’s wait­ing for me.”

Dis­con­cert them, she thought, keep them off bal­an­ce; and this an­gel did not know what he should do, so he did as she told him. She fol­lowed him for some min­utes, through those con­fus­ing per­spec­tives of light, un­til they came to an ‘ an­techam­ber. How they had en­tered, she didn’t know, but there they were, and af­ter a brief pause, some­thing in front of her opened like a door.

Her dae­mon’s sharp nails were press­ing in­to the flesh of her up­per arms, and she gripped his fur for re­as­sur­an­ce. Fac­ing them was a be­ing made of light. He was man­shaped, man­sized, she thought, but she was too daz­zled to see. The gold­en mon­key hid his face in her shoul­der, and she threw up an arm to hide her eyes.

Meta­tron said, “Where is she? Where is your daugh­ter?”

“I’ve come to tell you, my Lord Re­gent,” she said.

“If she was in your pow­er, you would have brought her.”

“She is not, but her dae­mon is.”

“How can that be?”

“I swear, Meta­tron, her dae­mon is in my pow­er. Please, great Re­gent, hide your­self a lit­tle, my eyes are daz­zled…”

He drew a veil of cloud in front of him­self. Now it was like look­ing at the sun through smoked glass, and her eyes could see him more clear­ly, though she still pre­tend­ed to be daz­zled by his face. He was ex­act­ly like a man in ear­ly mid­dle age, tall, pow­er­ful, and com­mand­ing. Was he clothed? Did he have wings? She couldn’t tell be­cause of the force of his eyes. She could look at noth­ing else.

“Please, Meta­tron, hear me. I have just come from Lord As­riel. He has the child’s dae­mon, and he knows that the child will soon come to search for him.”

“What does he want with the child?”

“To keep her from you un­til she comes of age. He doesn’t know where I’ve gone, and I must go back to him soon. I’m telling you the truth. Look at me, great Re­gent, as I can’t eas­ily look at you. Look at me clear­ly, and tell me what you see.”

The prince of the an­gels looked at her. It was the most search­ing ex­am­ina­tion Marisa Coul­ter had ev­er un­der­gone. Ev­ery scrap of shel­ter and de­ceit was stripped away, and she stood naked, body and ghost and dae­mon to­geth­er, un­der the fe­roc­ity of Meta­tron’s gaze.

And she knew that her na­ture would have to an­swer for her, and she was ter­ri­fied that what he saw in her would be in­suf­fi­cient. Lyra had lied to Io­fur Rakni­son with her words; her moth­er was ly­ing with her whole life.

“Yes, I see,” said Meta­tron.

“What do you see?”

“Cor­rup­tion and en­vy and lust for pow­er. Cru­el­ty and cold­ness. A vi­cious, prob­ing cu­rios­ity. Pure, poi­sonous, tox­ic mal­ice. You have nev­er from your ear­li­est years shown a shred of com­pas­sion or sym­pa­thy or kind­ness with­out cal­cu­lat­ing how it would re­turn to your ad­van­tage. You have tor­tured and killed with­out re­gret or hes­ita­tion; you have be­trayed and in­trigued and glo­ried in your treach­ery. You are a cesspit of moral filth.”

That voice, de­liv­er­ing that judg­ment, shook Mrs. Coul­ter pro­found­ly. She knew it was com­ing, and she dread­ed it; and yet she hoped for it, too, and now that it had been said, she felt a lit­tle gush of tri­umph.

She moved clos­er to him.

“So you see,” she said, “I can be­tray him eas­ily. I can lead you to where he’s tak­ing my daugh­ter’s dae­mon, and you can de­stroy As­riel, and the child will walk un­sus­pect­ing in­to your hands.”

She felt the move­ment of va­por about her, and her sens­es be­came con­fused. His next words pierced her flesh like darts of scent­ed ice.

“When I was a man,” he said, “I had wives in plen­ty, but none was as love­ly as you.”

“When you were a man?”

“When I was a man, I was known as Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Ma­ha­lalel, the son of Ke­nan, the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam. I lived on earth for six­ty­five years, and then the Au­thor­ity took me to his King­dom.”

“And you had many wives.”

“I loved their flesh. And I un­der­stood it when the sons of Heav­en fell in love with the daugh­ters of earth, and I plead­ed their cause with the Au­thor­ity. But his heart was fixed against them, and he made me proph­esy their doom.”

“And you have not known a wife for thou­sands of years…”

“I have been Re­gent of the King­dom.”

“And is it not time you had a con­sort?”

That was the mo­ment she felt most ex­posed and in most dan­ger. But she trust­ed to her flesh, and to the strange truth she’d learned about an­gels, per­haps es­pe­cial­ly those an­gels who had once been hu­man: lack­ing flesh, they cov­et­ed it and longed for con­tact with it. And Meta­tron was close now, close enough to smell the per­fume of her hair and to gaze at the tex­ture of her skin, close enough to touch her with scald­ing hands.

There was a strange sound, like the mur­mur and crack­le you hear be­fore you re­al­ize that what you’re hear­ing is your house on fire.

“Tell me what Lord As­riel is do­ing, and where he is,” he said.

“I can take you to him now,” she said.

The an­gels car­ry­ing the lit­ter left the Cloud­ed Moun­tain and flew south. Meta­tron’s or­ders had been to take the Au­thor­ity to a place of safe­ty away from the bat­tle­field, be­cause he want­ed him kept alive for a while yet; but rather than give him a body­guard of many reg­iments, which would on­ly at­tract the en­emy’s at­ten­tion, he had trust­ed to the ob­scu­ri­ty of the storm, cal­cu­lat­ing that in these cir­cum­stances, a small par­ty would be safer than a large one.

And so it might have been, if a cer­tain clif­fghast, busy feast­ing on a halfdead war­ri­or, had not looked up just as a ran­dom search­light caught the side of the crys­tal lit­ter.

Some­thing stirred in the clif­fghast’s mem­ory. He paused, one hand on the warm liv­er, and as his broth­er knocked him aside, the rec­ol­lec­tion of a bab­bling Arc­tic fox came to his mind.

At once he spread his leath­ery wings and bound­ed up­ward, and a mo­ment lat­er the rest of the troop fol­lowed.

Xapha­nia and her an­gels had searched dili­gent­ly all the night and some of the morn­ing, and fi­nal­ly they had found a minute crack in the moun­tain­side to the south of the fortress, which had not been there the day be­fore. They had ex­plored it and en­larged it, and now Lord As­riel was climb­ing down in­to a se­ries of cav­erns and tun­nels ex­tend­ing a long way be­low the fortress.

It wasn’t to­tal­ly dark, as he’d thought. There was a faint source of il­lu­mi­na­tion, like a stream of bil­li­ons of tiny par­ti­cles, faint­ly glow­ing. They flowed stea­di­ly down the tun­nel like a riv­er of light.

“Dust,” he said to his dae­mon.

He had nev­er seen it with the naked eye, but then he had nev­er seen so much Dust to­geth­er. He moved on, un­til quite sud­den­ly the tun­nel opened out, and he found him­self at the top of a vast cav­ern: a vault im­mense enough to con­tain a dozen cathe­drals. There was no floor; the sides sloped ver­tig­in­ous­ly down to­ward the edge of a great pit hun­dreds of feet be­low, and dark­er than dark­ness it­self, and in­to the pit streamed the end­less Dust fall, pour­ing cease­less­ly down. Its bil­li­ons of par­ti­cles were like the stars of ev­ery galaxy in the sky, and ev­ery one of them was a lit­tle frag­ment of con­scious thought. It was a melan­choly light to see by.

He climbed with his dae­mon down to­ward the abyss, and as they went, they grad­ual­ly be­gan to see what was hap­pen­ing along the far side of the gulf, hun­dreds of yards away in the gloom. He had thought there was a move­ment there, and the far­ther down he climbed, the more clear­ly it re­solved it­self: a pro­ces­sion of dim, pale fig­ures pick­ing their way along the per­ilous slope, men, wom­en, chil­dren, be­in­gs of ev­ery kind he had seen and many he had not. In­tent on keep­ing their bal­an­ce, they ig­nored him al­to­geth­er, and Lord As­riel felt the hair stir at the back of his neck when he re­al­ized that they were ghosts.

“Lyra came here,” he said qui­et­ly to the snow leop­ard.

“Tread care­ful­ly,” was all she said in re­ply.

Will and Lyra were soaked through, shiv­er­ing, racked with pain, and stum­bling blind­ly through mud and over rocks and in­to lit­tle gul­lies where stormfed streams ran red with blood. Lyra was afraid that the La­dy Salmakia was dy­ing: she hadn’t ut­tered a word for sev­er­al min­utes, and she lay faint and limp in Lyra’s hand.

As they shel­tered in one riverbed where the wa­ter was white, at least, and scooped up hand­fuls to their thirsty mouths, Will felt Tialys rouse him­self and say:

“Will, I can hear hors­es com­ing, Lord As­riel has no cav­al­ry. It must be the en­emy. Get across the stream and hide, I saw some bush­es that way…”

“Come on,” said Will to Lyra, and they splashed through the icy, boneach­ing wa­ter and scram­bled up the far side of the gul­ly just in time. The rid­ers who came over the slope and clat­tered down to drink didn’t look like cav­al­ry: they seemed to be of the same kind of close­haired flesh as their hors­es, and they had nei­ther clothes nor har­ness. They car­ried weapons, though: tri­dents, nets, and scim­itars.

Will and Lyra didn’t stop to look; they stum­bled over the rough ground at a crouch, in­tent on­ly on get­ting away un­seen.

But they had to keep their heads low to see where they were tread­ing and avoid twist­ing an an­kle, or worse, and thun­der ex­plod­ed over­head as they ran, so they couldn’t hear the screech­ing and snarling of the clif­fghasts un­til they were up­on them.

The crea­tures were sur­round­ing some­thing that lay glit­ter­ing in the mud: some­thing slight­ly taller than they were, which lay on its side, a large cage, per­haps, with walls of crys­tal. They were ham­mer­ing at it with fists and rocks, shriek­ing and yelling.

And be­fore Will and Lyra could stop and run the oth­er way, they had stum­bled right in­to the mid­dle of the troop.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-ONE - AUTHORITYS END


Mrs. Coul­ter whis­pered to the shad­ow be­side her:

“Look how he hides, Meta­tron! He creeps through the dark like a rat…”

They stood on a ledge high up in the great cav­ern, watch­ing Lord As­riel and the snow leop­ard make their care­ful way down, a long way be­low.

“I could strike him now,” the shad­ow whis­pered.

“Yes, of course you could,” she whis­pered back, lean­ing close; “but I want to see his face, dear Meta­tron; I want him to know I’ve be­trayed him. Come, let’s fol­low and catch him…”

The Dust fall shone like a great pil­lar of faint light as it de­scend­ed smooth­ly and nev­erend­ing­ly in­to the gulf. Mrs. Coul­ter had no at­ten­tion to spare for it, be­cause the shad­ow be­side her was trem­bling with de­sire, and she had to keep him by her side, un­der what con­trol she could man­age.

They moved down, silent, fol­low­ing Lord As­riel. The far­ther down they climbed, the more she felt a great weari­ness fall over her.

“What? What?” whis­pered the shad­ow, feel­ing her emo­tions, and sus­pi­cious at once.

“I was think­ing,” she said with a sweet mal­ice, “how glad I am that the child will nev­er grow up to love and be loved. I thought I loved her when she was a ba­by; but now…

“There was re­gret,” the shad­ow said, “in your heart there was re­gret that you will not see her grow up.”

“Oh, Meta­tron, how long it is since you were a man! Can you re­al­ly not tell what it is I’m re­gret­ting? It’s not her com­ing of age, but mine. How bit­ter­ly I re­gret that I didn’t know of you in my own girl­hood; how pas­sion­ate­ly I would have de­vot­ed my­self to you…”

She leaned to­ward the shad­ow, as if she couldn’t con­trol the im­puls­es of her own body, and the shad­ow hun­gri­ly sniffed and seemed to gulp at the scent of her flesh.

They were mov­ing la­bo­ri­ous­ly over the tum­bled and bro­ken rocks to­ward the foot of the slope. The far­ther down they went, the more the Dust light gave ev­ery­thing a nim­bus of gold­en mist. Mrs. Coul­ter kept reach­ing for where his hand might have been if the shad­ow had been a hu­man com­pan­ion, and then seemed to rec­ol­lect her­self, and whis­pered:

“Keep be­hind me, Meta­tron, wait here, As­riel is sus­pi­cious, let me lull him first. When he’s off guard, I’ll call you. But come as a shad­ow, in this small form, so he doesn’t see you, oth­er­wise, he’ll just let the child’s dae­mon fly away.”

The Re­gent was a be­ing whose pro­found in­tel­lect had had thou­sands of years to deep­en and strength­en it­self, and whose knowl­edge ex­tend­ed over a mil­li­on uni­vers­es. Nev­er­the­less, at that mo­ment he was blind­ed by his twin ob­ses­sions: to de­stroy Lyra and to pos­sess her moth­er. He nod­ded and stayed where he was, while the wom­an and the mon­key moved for­ward as qui­et­ly as they could.

Lord As­riel was wait­ing be­hind a great block of gran­ite, out of sight of the Re­gent. The snow leop­ard heard them com­ing, and Lord As­riel stood up as Mrs. Coul­ter came around the cor­ner. Ev­ery­thing, ev­ery sur­face, ev­ery cu­bic cen­time­ter of air, was per­me­at­ed by the falling Dust, which gave a soft clar­ity to ev­ery tiny de­tail; and in the Dust light Lord As­riel saw that her face was wet with tears, and that she was grit­ting her teeth so as not to sob.

He took her in his arms, and the gold­en mon­key em­braced the snow leop­ard’s neck and buried his black face in her fur.

“Is Lyra safe? Has she found her dae­mon?” she whis­pered.

“The ghost of the boy’s fa­ther is pro­tect­ing both of them.”

“Dust is beau­ti­ful… I nev­er knew.”

“What did you tell him?”

“I lied and lied, As­riel.. .Let’s not wait too long, I can’t bear it… We won’t live, will we? We won’t sur­vive like the ghosts?”

“Not if we fall in­to the abyss. We came here to give Lyra time to find her dae­mon, and then time to live and grow up. If we take Meta­tron to ex­tinc­tion, Marisa, she’ll have that time, and if we go with him, it doesn’t mat­ter.”

“And Lyra will be safe?”

“Yes, yes,” he said gen­tly.

He kissed her. She felt as soft and light in his arms as she had when Lyra was con­ceived thir­teen years be­fore.

She was sob­bing qui­et­ly. When she could speak, she whis­pered:

“I told him I was go­ing to be­tray you, and be­tray Lyra, and he be­lieved me be­cause I was cor­rupt and full of wicked­ness; he looked so deep I felt sure he’d see the truth. But I lied too well. I was ly­ing with ev­ery nerve and fiber and ev­ery­thing I’d ev­er done…I want­ed him to find no good in me, and he didn’t. There is none. But I love Lyra. Where did this love come from? I don’t know; it came to me like a thief in the night, and now I love her so much my heart is burst­ing with it. All I could hope was that my crimes were so mon­strous that the love was no big­ger than a mus­tard seed in the shad­ow of them, and I wished I’d com­mit­ted even greater ones to hide it more deeply still… But the mus­tard seed had tak­en root and was grow­ing, and the lit­tle green shoot was split­ting my heart wide open, and I was so afraid he’d see…”

She had to stop to gath­er her­self. He stroked her shin­ing hair, all set about with gold­en Dust, and wait­ed.

“Any mo­ment now he’ll lose pa­tience,” she whis­pered. “I told him to make him­self small. But he’s on­ly an an­gel, af­ter all, even if he was once a man. And we can wres­tle with him and bring him to the edge of the gulf, and we’ll both go down with him…”

He kissed her, say­ing, “Yes. Lyra will be safe, and the King­dom will be pow­er­less against her. Call him now, Marisa, my love.”

She took a deep breath and let it out in a long, shud­der­ing sigh. Then she smoothed her skirt down over her thighs and tucked the hair back be­hind her ears.

“Meta­tron,” she called soft­ly. “It’s time.”

Meta­tron’s shad­ow­cloaked form ap­peared out of the gold­en air and took in at once what was hap­pen­ing: the two dae­mons, crouch­ing and watch­ful, the wom­an with the nim­bus of Dust, and Lord As­riel…

Who leapt at him at once, seiz­ing him around the waist, and tried to hurl him to the ground. The an­gel’s arms were free, though, and with fists, palms, el­bows, knuck­les, fore­arms, he bat­tered Lord As­riel’s head and body: great pum­mel­ing blows that forced the breath from his lungs and re­bound­ed from his ribs, that cracked against his skull and shook his sens­es.

How­ev­er, his arms en­cir­cled the an­gel’s wings, cramp­ing them to his side. And a mo­ment lat­er, Mrs. Coul­ter had leapt up be­tween those pin­ioned wings and seized Meta­tron’s hair. His strength was enor­mous: it was like hold­ing the mane of a bolt­ing horse. As he shook his head fu­ri­ous­ly, she was flung this way and that, and she felt the pow­er in the great fold­ed wings as they strained and heaved at the man’s arms locked so tight­ly around them.

The dae­mons had seized hold of him, too. Stel­maria had her teeth firm­ly in his leg, and the gold­en mon­key was tear­ing at one of the edges of the near­est wing, snap­ping feath­ers, rip­ping at the vanes, and this on­ly roused the an­gel to greater fury. With a sud­den mas­sive ef­fort he flung him­self side­ways, free­ing one wing and crush­ing Mrs. Coul­ter against a rock.

Mrs. Coul­ter was stunned for a sec­ond, and her hands came loose. At once the an­gel reared up again, beat­ing his one free wing to fling off the gold­en mon­key; but Lord As­riel’s arms were firm around him still, and in fact the man had a bet­ter grip now there wasn’t so much to en­close. Lord As­riel set him­self to crush­ing the breath out of Meta­tron, grind­ing his ribs to­geth­er, and try­ing to ig­nore the sav­age blows that were land­ing on his skull and his neck.

But those blows were be­gin­ning to tell. And as Lord As­riel tried to keep his foot­ing on the bro­ken rocks, some­thing shat­ter­ing hap­pened to the back of his head. When he flung him­self side­ways, Meta­tron had seized a fist­sized rock, and now he brought it down with bru­tal force on the point of Lord As­riel’s skull. The man felt the bones of his head move against each oth­er, and he knew that an­oth­er blow like that would kill him out­right. Dizzy with pain, pain that was worse for the pres­sure of his head against the an­gel’s side, he still clung fast, the fin­gers of his right hand crush­ing the bones of his left, and stum­bled for a foot­ing among the frac­tured rocks.

And as Meta­tron raised the bloody stone high, a gold­en­furred shape sprang up like a flame leap­ing to a tree­top, and the mon­key sank his teeth in­to the an­gel’s hand. The rock came loose and clat­tered down to­ward the edge, and Meta­tron swept his arm to left and right, try­ing to dis­lodge the dae­mon; but the gold­en mon­key clung with teeth, claws, and tail, and then Mrs. Coul­ter gath­ered the great white beat­ing wing to her­self and smoth­ered its move­ment.

Meta­tron was ham­pered, but he still wasn’t hurt. Nor was he near the edge of the abyss.

And by now Lord As­riel was weak­en­ing. He was hold­ing fast to his blood­soaked con­scious­ness, but with ev­ery move­ment a lit­tle more was lost. He could feel the edges of the bones grind­ing to­geth­er in his skull; he could hear them. His sens­es were dis­or­dered; all he knew was hold tight and drag down.

Then Mrs. Coul­ter found the an­gel’s face un­der her hand, and she dug her fin­gers deep in­to his eyes.

Meta­tron cried out. From far off across the great cav­ern, echoes an­swered, and his voice bound­ed from cliff to cliff, dou­bling and di­min­ish­ing and caus­ing those dis­tant ghosts to pause in their end­less pro­ces­sion and look up.

And Stel­maria the snowl­eop­ard dae­mon, her own con­scious­ness dim­ming with Lord As­riel’s, made one last ef­fort and leapt for the an­gel’s throat.

Meta­tron fell to his knees. Mrs. Coul­ter, falling with him, saw the blood­filled eyes of Lord As­riel gaze at her. And she scram­bled up, hand over hand, forc­ing the beat­ing wing aside, and seized the an­gel’s hair to wrench back his head and bare his throat for the snow leop­ard’s teeth.

And now Lord As­riel was drag­ging him, drag­ging him back­ward, feet stum­bling and rocks falling, and the gold­en mon­key was leap­ing down with them, snap­ping and scratch­ing and tear­ing, and they were al­most there, al­most at the edge; but Meta­tron forced him­self up, and with a last ef­fort spread both wings wide, a great white canopy that beat down and down and down, again and again and again, and then Mrs. Coul­ter had fall­en away, and Meta­tron was up­right, and the wings beat hard­er and hard­er, and he was aloft, he was leav­ing the ground, with Lord As­riel still cling­ing tight, but weak­en­ing fast. The gold­en mon­key’s fin­gers were en­twined in the an­gel’s hair, and he would nev­er let go…

But they were over the edge of the abyss. They were ris­ing. And if they flew high­er, Lord As­riel would fall, and Meta­tron would es­cape.

“Marisa! Marisa!”

The cry was torn from Lord As­riel, and with the snow leop­ard be­side her, with a roar­ing in her ears, Lyra’s moth­er stood and found her foot­ing and leapt with all her heart, to hurl her­self against the an­gel and her dae­mon and her dy­ing lover, and seize those beat­ing wings, and bear them all down to­geth­er in­to the abyss.

The clif­fghasts heard Lyra’s ex­cla­ma­tion of dis­may, and their flat heads all snapped around at once.

Will sprang for­ward and slashed the knife at the near­est of them. He felt a lit­tle kick on his shoul­der as Tialys leapt off and land­ed on the cheek of the biggest, seiz­ing her hair and kick­ing hard be­low the jaw be­fore she could throw him off. The crea­ture howled and thrashed as she fell in­to the mud, and the near­est one looked stupid­ly at the stump of his arm, and then in hor­ror at his own an­kle, which his sliced­off hand had seized as it fell. A sec­ond lat­er the knife was in his breast. Will felt the han­dle jump three or four times with the dy­ing heart­beats, and pulled it out be­fore the clif­fghast could twist it away in falling.

He heard the oth­ers cry and shriek in ha­tred as they fled, and he knew that Lyra was un­hurt be­side him; but he threw him­self down in the mud with on­ly one thing in his mind.

“Tialys! Tialys!” he cried, and avoid­ing the snap­ping teeth, he hauled the biggest clif­fghast’s head aside. Tialys was dead, his spurs deep in her neck. The crea­ture was kick­ing and bit­ing still, so he cut off her head and rolled it away be­fore lift­ing the dead Gal­livespi­an clear of the leath­ery neck.

“Will,” said Lyra be­hind him, “Will, look at this…”

She was gaz­ing in­to the crys­tal lit­ter. It was un­bro­ken, al­though the crys­tal was stained and smeared with mud and the blood from what the clif­fghasts had been eat­ing be­fore they found it. It lay tilt­ed crazi­ly among the rocks, and in­side it…

“Oh, Will, he’s still alive! But, the poor thing…”

Will saw her hands press­ing against the crys­tal, try­ing to reach in to the an­gel and com­fort him; be­cause he was so old, and he was ter­ri­fied, cry­ing like a ba­by and cow­er­ing away in­to the low­est cor­ner.

“He must be so old, I’ve nev­er seen any­one suf­fer­ing like that, oh, Will, can’t we let him out?”

Will cut through the crys­tal in one move­ment and reached in to help the an­gel out. De­ment­ed and pow­er­less, the aged be­ing could on­ly weep and mum­ble in fear and pain and mis­ery, and he shrank away from what seemed like yet an­oth­er threat.

“It’s all right,” Will said, “we can help you hide, at least. Come on, we won’t hurt you.”

The shak­ing hand seized his and fee­bly held on. The old one was ut­ter­ing a word­less groan­ing whim­per that went on and on, and grind­ing his teeth, and com­pul­sive­ly pluck­ing at him­self with his free hand; but as Lyra reached in, too, to help him out, he tried to smile, and to bow, and his an­cient eyes deep in their wrin­kles blinked at her with in­no­cent won­der.

Be­tween them they helped the an­cient of days out of his crys­tal cell; it wasn’t hard, for he was as light as pa­per, and he would have fol­lowed them any­where, hav­ing no will of his own, and re­spond­ing to sim­ple kind­ness like a flow­er to the sun. But in the open air there was noth­ing to stop the wind from dam­ag­ing him, and to their dis­may his form be­gan to loosen and dis­solve. On­ly a few mo­ments lat­er he had van­ished com­plete­ly, and their last im­pres­sion was of those eyes, blink­ing in won­der, and a sigh of the most pro­found and ex­haust­ed re­lief.

Then he was gone: a mys­tery dis­solv­ing in mys­tery. It had all tak­en less than a minute, and Will turned back at once to the fall­en Che­va­li­er. He picked up the lit­tle body, cradling it in his palms, and found his tears flow­ing fast.

But Lyra was say­ing some­thing ur­gent­ly.

“Will, we’ve got to move, we’ve got to, the La­dy can hear those hors­es com­ing…

Out of the in­di­go sky an in­di­go hawk swooped low, and Lyra cried out and ducked; but Salmakia cried with all her strength, “No, Lyra! No! Stand high, and hold out your fist!”

So Lyra held still, sup­port­ing one arm with the oth­er, and the blue hawk wheeled and turned and swooped again, to seize her knuck­les in sharp claws.

On the hawk’s back sat a gray­haired la­dy, whose cleareyed face looked first at Lyra, then at Salmakia cling­ing to her col­lar.

“Madame…” said Salmakia faint­ly, “we have done…”

“You have done all you need. Now we are here,” said Madame Ox­en­tiel, and twitched the reins.

At once the hawk screamed three times, so loud that Lyra’s head rang. In re­sponse there dart­ed from the sky first one, then two and three and more, then hun­dreds of bril­liant war­ri­or­bear­ing drag­on­flies, all skim­ming so fast it seemed they were bound to crash in­to one an­oth­er; but the re­flex­es of the in­sects and the skills of their rid­ers were so acute that in­stead, they seemed to weave a tapestry of swift and silent nee­dle­bright col­or over and around the chil­dren.

“Lyra,” said the la­dy on the hawk, “and Will: fol­low us now, and we shall take you to your dae­mons.”

As the hawk spread its wings and lift­ed away from one hand, Lyra felt the lit­tle weight of Salmakia fall in­to the oth­er, and knew in a mo­ment that on­ly the La­dy’s strength of mind had kept her alive this long. She cra­dled her body close, and ran with Will un­der the cloud of drag­on­flies, stum­bling and falling more than once, but hold­ing the La­dy gen­tly against her heart all the time.

“Left! Left!” cried the voice from the blue hawk, and in the light­ningriv­en murk they turned that way; and to their right Will saw a body of men in light gray ar­mor, hel­met­ed, masked, their gray wolf dae­mons padding in step be­side them. A stream of drag­on­flies made for them at once, and the men fal­tered. Their guns were no use, and the Gal­livespi­ans were among them in a mo­ment, each war­ri­or spring­ing from his in­sect’s back, find­ing a hand, an arm, a bare neck, and plung-: ing his spur in be­fore leap­ing back to the in­sect as it wheeled and skimmed past again. They were so quick it was al­most im­pos­si­ble to fol­low. The sol­diers turned and fled in pan­ic, their dis­ci­pline shat­tered.

But then came hoof­beats in a sud­den thun­der from be­hind, and the chil­dren turned in dis­may: those horsepeo­ple were bear­ing down on them at a gal­lop, and al­ready one or two had nets in their hands, whirling them around over their heads and en­trap­ping the drag­on­flies, to snap the nets like whips and fling the bro­ken in­sects aside.

“This way!” came the La­dy’s voice, and then she said, “Duck, now, get down low!”

They did, and felt the earth shake un­der them. Could that be hoof­beats? Lyra raised her head and wiped the wet hair from her eyes, and saw some­thing quite dif­fer­ent from hors­es.

“Iorek!” she cried, joy leap­ing in her chest. “Oh, Iorek!”

Will pulled her down again at once, for not on­ly Iorek Byr­ni­son but a reg­iment of his bears were mak­ing di­rect­ly for them. Just in time Lyra tucked her head down, and then Iorek bound­ed over them, roar­ing or­ders to his hears to go left, go right, and crush the en­emy be­tween them.

Light­ly, as if his ar­mor weighed no more than his fur, the bear­king spun to face Will and Lyra, who were strug­gling up­right.

“Iorek, be­hind you, they’ve got nets!” Will cried, be­cause the rid­ers were al­most on them.

Be­fore the bear could move, a rid­er’s net hissed through the air, and in­stant­ly Iorek was en­veloped in steel­strong cob­web. He roared, rear­ing high, slash­ing with huge paws at the rid­er. But the net was strong, and al­though the horse whin­nied and reared back in fear, Iorek couldn’t fight free of the coils.

“Iorek!” Will shout­ed. “Keep still! Don’t move!”

He scram­bled for­ward through the pud­dles and over the tus­socks as the rid­er tried to con­trol the horse, and reached Iorek just at the mo­ment when a sec­ond rid­er ar­rived and an­oth­er net hissed through the air.

But Will kept his head: in­stead of slash­ing wild­ly and get­ting in more of a tan­gle, he watched the flow of the net and cut it through in a mat­ter of mo­ments. The sec­ond net fell use­less to the ground, and then Will leapt at Iorek, feel­ing with his left hand, cut­ting with his right. The great bear stood mo­tion­less as the boy dart­ed here and there over his vast body, cut­ting, free­ing, clear­ing the way.

“Now go!” Will yelled, leap­ing clear, and Iorek seemed to ex­plode up­ward full in­to the chest of the near­est horse.

The rid­er had raised his scim­itar to sweep down at the bear’s neck, but Iorek Byr­ni­son in his ar­mor weighed near­ly two tons, and noth­ing at that range could with­stand him. Horse and rid­er, both of them smashed and shat­tered, fell harm­less­ly aside. Iorek gath­ered his bal­an­ce, looked around to see how the land lay, and roared to the chil­dren:

“On my back! Now!”

Lyra leapt up, and Will fol­lowed. Press­ing the cold iron be­tween their legs, they felt the mas­sive surge of pow­er as Iorek be­gan to move.

Be­hind them, the rest of the bears were en­gag­ing with the strange cav­al­ry, helped by the Gal­livespi­ans, whose stings en­raged the hors­es. The la­dy on the blue hawk skimmed low and called: “Straight ahead now! Among the trees in the val­ley!”

Iorek reached the top of a lit­tle rise in the ground and paused. Ahead of them the bro­ken ground sloped down to­ward a grove about a quar­ter of a mile away. Some­where be­yond that a bat­tery of great guns was fir­ing shell af­ter shell, howl­ing high over­head, and some­one was fir­ing flares, too, that burst just un­der the clouds and drift­ed down to­ward the trees, mak­ing them blaze with cold green light as a fine tar­get for the guns.

And fight­ing for con­trol of the grove it­self were a score or more Specters, be­ing held back by a ragged band of ghosts. As soon as they saw that lit­tle group of trees, Lyra and Will both knew that their dae­mons were in there, and that if they didn’t reach them soon, they would die. More Specters were ar­riv­ing there ev­ery minute, stream­ing over the ridge from the right. Will and Lyra could see them very clear­ly now.

An ex­plo­sion just over the ridge shook the ground and flung stones and clods of earth high in­to the air. Lyra cried out, and Will had to clutch his chest.

“Hold on,” Iorek growled, and be­gan to charge.

A flare burst high above, and an­oth­er and an­oth­er, drift­ing slow­ly down­ward with a mag­ne­sium­bright glare. An­oth­er shell burst, clos­er this time, and they felt the shock of the air and a sec­ond or two lat­er the sting of earth and stones on their faces. Iorek didn’t fal­ter, but they found it hard to hold on. They couldn’t dig their fin­gers in­to his fur, they had to grip the ar­mor be­tween their knees, and his hack was so broad that both of them kept slip­ping.

“Look!” cried Lyra, point­ing up as an­oth­er shell burst near­by.

A dozen witch­es were mak­ing for the flares, car­ry­ing thick­leaved, bushy branch­es, and with them they brushed the glar­ing lights aside, sweep­ing them away in­to the sky be­yond. Dark­ness fell over the grove again, hid­ing it from the guns.

And now the grove was on­ly a few yards away. Will and Lyra both felt their miss­ing selves close by, an ex­cite­ment, a wild hope chilled with fear, be­cause the Specters were thick among the trees and they would have to go in di­rect­ly among them, and the very sight of them evoked that nau­se­at­ing weak­ness at the heart.

“They’re afraid of the knife,” said a voice be­side them, and the bear­king stopped so sud­den­ly that Will and Lyra tum­bled off his back.

“Lee!” said Iorek. “Lee, my com­rade, I have nev­er seen this be­fore. You are dead, what am I speak­ing to?”

“Iorek, old feller, you don’t know the half of it. We’ll take over now, the Specters aren’t afraid of bears. Lyra, Will, come this way, and hold up that knife…

The blue hawk swooped once more to Lyra’s fist, and the gray­haired la­dy said, “Don’t waste a sec­ond, go in and find your dae­mons and es­cape! There’s more dan­ger com­ing.”

“Thank you, La­dy! Thank you all!” said Lyra, and the hawk took wing.

Will could see Lee Scores­by’s ghost dim­ly be­side them, urg­ing them in­to the grove, but they had to say farewell to Iorek Byr­ni­son.

“Iorek, my dear, there en’t words, bless you, bless you!”

“Thank you, King Iorek,” said Will.

“No time. Go. Go!”

He pushed them away with his ar­mored head. Will plunged af­ter Lee Scores­by’s ghost in­to the un­der­growth, slash­ing to right and left with the knife. The light here was bro­ken and mut­ed, and the shad­ows were thick, tan­gled, con­fus­ing.

“Keep close,” he called to Lyra, and then cried out as a bram­ble sliced across his cheek.

All around them there was move­ment, noise, and strug­gle. The shad­ows moved to and fro like branch­es in a high wind. They might have been ghosts: both chil­dren felt the lit­tle dash­es of cold they knew so well. Then they heard voic­es all around:

“This way!”

“Over here!”

“Keep go­ing, we’re hold­ing them off!”

“Not far now!”

And then came a cry in a voice that Lyra knew and loved bet­ter than any oth­er:

“Oh, come quick! Quick, Lyra!”

“Pan, dar­ling, I’m here…

She hurled her­self in­to the dark, sob­bing and shak­ing, and Will tore down branch­es and ivy and slashed at bram­bles and net­tles, while all around them the ghostvoic­es rose in a clam­or of en­cour­age­ment and warn­ing.

But the Specters had found their tar­get, too, and they pressed in through the snag­ging tan­gle of bush and bri­ar and root and branch, meet­ing no more re­sis­tance than smoke. A dozen, a score of the pal­lid ma­lig­ni­ties seemed to pour in to­ward the cen­ter of the grove, where John Par­ry’s ghost mar­shaled his com­pan­ions to fight them off.

Will and Lyra were both trem­bling and weak with fear, ex­haus­tion, nau­sea, and pain, but giv­ing up was in­con­ceiv­able. Lyra tore at the bram­bles with her bare hands, Will slashed and hacked to left and right, as around them the com­bat of the shad­owy be­in­gs be­came more and more sav­age.

“There!” cried Lee. “See ‘em? By that big rock…

A wild­cat, two wild­cats, spit­ting and hiss­ing and slash­ing. Both were dae­mons, and Will felt that if there were time he’d eas­ily be able to tell which was Pan­ta­lai­mon; but there wasn’t time, be­cause a Specter eased hor­ri­bly out of the near­est patch of shad­ow and glid­ed to­ward the dae­mons.

Will leapt over the last ob­sta­cle, a fall­en tree trunk, and plunged the knife in­to the un­re­sist­ing shim­mer in the air. He felt his arm go numb, but he clenched his teeth as he was clench­ing his fin­gers around the hilt, and the pale form seemed to boil away and melt back in­to the dark­ness again.

Al­most there; and the dae­mons were mad with fear, be­cause more Specters and still more came press­ing through the trees, and on­ly the valiant ghosts were hold­ing them back.

“Can you cut through?” said John Par­ry’s ghost.

Will held up the knife, and had to stop as a rack­ing bout of nau­sea shook him from head to toe. There was noth­ing left in his stom­ach, and the spasm hurt dread­ful­ly. Lyra be­side him was in the same state. Lee’s ghost, see­ing why, leapt for the dae­mons and wres­tled with the pale thing that was com­ing through the rock from be­hind them.

“Will, please… said Lyra, gasp­ing.

In went the knife, along, down, back. Lee Scores­by’s ghost looked through and saw a wide, qui­et prairie un­der a bril­liant moon, so very like his own home­land that he thought he’d been blessed.

Will leapt across the clear­ing and seized the near­est dae­mon while Lyra scooped up the oth­er.

And even in that hor­ri­ble ur­gen­cy, even at that mo­ment of ut­most per­il, each of them felt the same lit­tle shock of ex­cite­ment: for Lyra was hold­ing Will’s dae­mon, the name­less wild­cat, and Will was car­ry­ing Pan­ta­lai­mon.

They tore their glance away from each oth­er’s eyes.

“Good­bye, Mr. Scores­by!” Lyra cried, look­ing around for him. “I wish, oh, thank you, thank you, good­bye!”

“Good­bye, my dear child, good­bye, Will, go well!”

Lyra scram­bled through, but Will stood still and looked in­to the eyes of his fa­ther’s ghost, bril­liant in the shad­ows. Be­fore he left him, there was some­thing he had to say.

Will said to his fa­ther’s ghost, “You said I was a war­ri­or. You told me that was my na­ture, and I shouldn’t ar­gue with it. Fa­ther, you were wrong. I fought be­cause I had to. I can’t choose my na­ture, but I can choose what I do. And I will choose, be­cause now I’m free.”

His fa­ther’s smile was full of pride and ten­der­ness. “Well done, my boy. Well done in­deed,” he said.

Will couldn’t see him any­more. He turned and climbed through af­ter Lyra.

And now that their pur­pose was achieved, now the chil­dren had found their dae­mons and es­caped, the dead war­ri­ors al­lowed their atoms to re­lax and drift apart, at long, long last.

Out of the lit­tle grove, away from the baf­fled Specters, out of the val­ley, past the mighty form of his old com­pan­ion the ar­mor­clad bear, the last lit­tle scrap of the con­scious­ness that had been the aero­naut Lee Scores­by float­ed up­ward, just as his great bal­loon had done so many times. Un­trou­bled by the flares and the burst­ing shells, deaf to the ex­plo­sions and the shouts and cries of anger and warn­ing and pain, con­scious on­ly of his move­ment up­ward, the last of Lee Scores­by passed through the heavy clouds and came out un­der the bril­liant stars, where the atoms of his beloved dae­mon, Hes­ter, were wait­ing for him.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-TWO - MORNING


The wide gold­en prairie that Lee Scores­by’s ghost had seen briefly through the win­dow was ly­ing qui­et un­der the first sun of morn­ing.

Gold­en, but al­so yel­low, brown, green, and ev­ery one of the mil­li­on shades be­tween them; and black, in places, in lines and streaks of bright pitch; and sil­very, too, where the sun caught the tops of a par­tic­ular kind of grass just com­ing in­to flow­er; and blue, where a wide lake some way off and a small pond clos­er by re­flect­ed back the wide blue of the sky.

And qui­et, but not silent, for a soft breeze rus­tled the bil­li­ons of lit­tle stems, and a bil­li­on in­sects and oth­er small crea­tures scraped and hummed and chirruped in the grass, and a bird too high in the blue to be seen sang lit­tle loop­ing falls of bell notes now close by, now far off, and nev­er twice the same.

In all that wide land­scape the on­ly liv­ing things that were silent and still were the boy and the girl ly­ing asleep, back to back, un­der the shade of an out­crop of rock at the top of a lit­tle bluff.

They were so still, so pale, that they might have been dead. Hunger had drawn the skin over their faces, pain had left lines around their eyes, and they were cov­ered in dust and mud and not a lit­tle blood. And from the ab­so­lute pas­siv­ity of their limbs, they seemed in the last stages of ex­haus­tion.

Lyra was the first to wake. As the sun moved up the sky, it came past the rock above and touched her hair, and she be­gan to stir, and when the sun­light reached her eye­lids, she found her­self pulled up from the depths of sleep like a fish, slow and heavy and re­sis­tant.

But there was no ar­gu­ing with the sun, and present­ly she moved her head and threw her arm across her eyes and mur­mured: “Pan, Pan…”

Un­der the shad­ow of her arm, she opened her eyes and came prop­er­ly awake. She didn’t move for some time, be­cause her arms and legs were so sore, and ev­ery part of her body felt limp with weari­ness; but still she was awake, and she felt the lit­tle breeze and the sun’s warmth, and she heard the lit­tle in­sect scrap­in­gs and the bell song of that bird high above. It was all good. She had for­got­ten how good the world was.

Present­ly she rolled over and saw Will, still fast asleep. His hand had bled a lot, his shirt was ripped and filthy, his hair was stiff with dust and sweat. She looked at him for a long time, at the lit­tle pulse in his throat, at his chest ris­ing and falling slow­ly, at the del­icate shad­ows his eye­lash­es made when the sun fi­nal­ly reached them.

He mur­mured some­thing and stirred. Not want­ing to be caught look­ing at him, she looked the oth­er way at the lit­tle grave they’d dug the night be­fore, just a cou­ple of hand spans wide, where the bod­ies of the Che­va­li­er Tialys and the La­dy Salmakia now lay at rest. There was a flat stone near­by; she got up and prized it loose from the soil, and set it up­right at the head of the grave, and then sat up and shad­ed her eyes to gaze across the plain.

It seemed to stretch for­ev­er and ev­er. It was nowhere en­tire­ly flat; gen­tle un­du­la­tions and lit­tle ridges and gul­lies var­ied the sur­face wher­ev­er she looked, and here and there she saw a stand of trees so tall they seemed to be con­struct­ed rather than grown. Their straight trunks and dark green canopy seemed to de­fy dis­tance, be­ing so clear­ly vis­ible at what must have been many miles away.

Clos­er, though, in fact, at the foot of the bluff, not more than a hun­dred yards away, there was a lit­tle pond fed by a spring com­ing out of the rock, and Lyra re­al­ized how thirsty she was.

She got up on shaky legs and walked slow­ly down to­ward it. The spring gur­gled and trick­led through mossy rocks, and she dipped her hands in it again and again, wash­ing them clear of the mud and grime be­fore lift­ing the wa­ter to her mouth. It was teethaching­ly cold, and she sw­al­lowed it with de­light.

The pond was fringed with reeds, where a frog was croak­ing. It was shal­low and warmer than the spring, as she dis­cov­ered when she took off her shoes and wad­ed in­to it. She stood for a long time with the sun on her head and her body, rel­ish­ing the cool mud un­der her feet and the cold flow of spring­wa­ter around her calves.

She bent down to dip her face un­der the wa­ter and wet her hair thor­ough­ly, let­ting it trail out and flick­ing it back again, stir­ring it with her fin­gers to lift all the dust and grime out.

When she felt a lit­tle clean­er and her thirst was sat­is­fied, she looked up the slope again, to see that Will was awake. He was sit­ting with his knees drawn up and his arms across them, look­ing out across the plain as she’d done, and mar­vel­ing at the ex­tent of it. And at the light, and at the warmth, and at the qui­et.

She climbed slow­ly back to join him and found him cut­ting the names of the Gal­livespi­ans on the lit­tle head­stone, and set­ting it more firm­ly in the soil.

“Are they…” he said, and she knew he meant the dae­mons.

“Don’t know. I haven’t seen Pan. I got the feel­ing he’s not far away, but I don’t know. D’you re­mem­ber what hap­pened?”

He rubbed his eyes and yawned so deeply she heard lit­tle crack­ing nois­es in his jaw. Then he blinked and shook his head.

“Not much,” he said. “I picked up Pan­ta­lai­mon and you picked up, the oth­er one and we came through, and it was moon­light ev­ery­where, and I put him down to close the win­dow.”

“And your, the oth­er dae­mon just jumped out of my arms,” she said. “And I was try­ing to see Mr. Scores­by through the win­dow, and Iorek, and to see where Pan had gone, and when I looked around, they just weren’t there.”

“It doesn’t feel like when we went in­to the world of the dead, though. Like when we were re­al­ly sep­arat­ed.”

“No,” she agreed. “They’re some­where near all right. I re­mem­ber when we were young we used to try and play hide­and­seek, ex­cept it nev­er re­al­ly worked, be­cause I was too big to hide from him and I al­ways used to know ex­act­ly where he was, even if he was cam­ou­flaged as a moth or some­thing. But this is strange,” she said, pass­ing her hands over her head in­vol­un­tar­ily as if she were try­ing to dis­pel some en­chant­ment. “He en’t here, but I don’t feel torn apart, I feel safe, and I know he is.”

“They’re to­geth­er, I think,” Will said.

“Yeah. They must be.”

He stood up sud­den­ly.

“Look,” he said, “over there…”

He was shad­ing his eyes and point­ing. She fol­lowed his gaze and saw a dis­tant tremor of move­ment, quite dif­fer­ent from the shim­mer of the heat haze.

“An­imals?” she said doubt­ful­ly.

“And lis­ten,” he said, putting his hand be­hind his ear.

Now he’d point­ed it out, she could hear a low, per­sis­tent rum­ble, al­most like thun­der, a very long way off.

“They’ve dis­ap­peared,” Will said, point­ing.

The lit­tle patch of mov­ing shad­ows had van­ished, but the rum­ble went on for a few mo­ments. Then it be­came sud­den­ly qui­eter, though it had been very qui­et al­ready. The two of them were still gaz­ing in the same di­rec­tion, and short­ly af­ter­ward they saw the move­ment start up again. And a few mo­ments lat­er came the sound.

“They went be­hind a ridge or some­thing,” said Will. “Are they clos­er?”

“Can’t re­al­ly see. Yes, they’re turn­ing, look, they’re com­ing this way.”

“Well, if we have to fight them, I want a drink first,” said Will, and he took the ruck­sack down to the stream, where he drank deep and washed off most of the dirt. His wound had bled a lot. He was a mess; he longed for a hot show­er with plen­ty of soap, and for some clean clothes.

Lyra was watch­ing the… what­ev­er they were; they were very strange.

“Will,” she called, “they’re rid­ing on wheels…”

But she said it un­cer­tain­ly. He climbed back a lit­tle way up the slope and shad­ed his eyes to look. It was pos­si­ble to see in­di­vid­uals now. The group, or herd, or gang, was about a dozen strong, and they were mov­ing, as Lyra said, on wheels. They looked like a cross be­tween an­telopes and mo­tor­cy­cles, but they were stranger than that, even: they had trunks like small ele­phants.

And they were mak­ing for Will and Lyra, with an air of in­ten­tion. Will took out the knife, but Lyra, sit­ting on the grass be­side him, was al­ready turn­ing the hands of the alethiome­ter.

It re­spond­ed quick­ly, while the crea­tures were still a few hun­dred yards away. The nee­dle dart­ed swift­ly left and right, and left and left, and Lyra felt her mind dart to the mean­in­gs and land on them as light­ly as a bird.

“They’re friend­ly,” she said, “it’s all right, Will, they’re look­ing for us, they knew we were here… And it’s odd, I can’t quite make it out… Dr. Mal­one ?”

She said the name half to her­self, be­cause she couldn’t be­lieve Dr. Mal­one would be in this world. Still, the alethiome­ter in­di­cat­ed her clear­ly, al­though of course it couldn’t give her name. Lyra put it away and stood up slow­ly be­side Will.

“I think we should go down to them,” she said. “They en’t go­ing to hurt us.”

Some of them had stopped, wait­ing. The lead­er moved ahead a lit­tle, trunk raised, and they could see how he pro­pelled him­self with pow­er­ful back­ward strokes of his lat­er­al limbs. Some of the crea­tures had gone to the pond to drink; the oth­ers wait­ed, but not with the mild, pas­sive cu­rios­ity of cows gath­er­ing at a gate. These were in­di­vid­uals, live­ly with in­tel­li­gence and pur­pose. They were peo­ple.

Will and Lyra moved down the slope un­til they were close enough to speak to them. In spite of what Lyra had said, Will kept his hand on the knife.

“I don’t know if you un­der­stand me,” Lyra said cau­tious­ly, “but I know you’re friend­ly. I think we should…

The lead­er moved his trunk and said, “Come see Mary. You ride. We car­ry. Come see Mary.”

“Oh!” she said, and turned to Will, smil­ing with de­light.

Two of the crea­tures were fit­ted with bri­dles and stir­rups of braid­ed cord. Not sad­dles; their di­amond­shaped backs turned out to be com­fort­able enough with­out them. Lyra had rid­den a bear, and Will had rid­den a bi­cy­cle, but nei­ther had rid­den a horse, which was the clos­est com­par­ison. How­ev­er, rid­ers of hors­es are usu­al­ly in con­trol, and the chil­dren soon found that they were not: the reins and the stir­rups were there sim­ply to give them some­thing to hold on to and bal­an­ce with. The crea­tures them­selves made all the de­ci­sions.

“Where are…” Will be­gan to say, but had to stop and re­gain his bal­an­ce as the crea­ture moved un­der him.

The group swung around and moved down the slight slope, go­ing slow­ly through the grass. The move­ment was humpy, but not un­com­fort­able, be­cause the crea­tures had no spine; Will and Lyra felt that they were sit­ting on chairs with a well­sprung seat.

Soon they came to what they hadn’t seen clear­ly from the bluff: one of those patch­es of black or dark brown ground. And they were as sur­prised to find roads of smooth rock lac­ing through the prairie as Mary Mal­one had been some­time be­fore.

The crea­tures rolled on­to the sur­face and set off, soon pick­ing up speed. The road was more like a wa­ter­course than a high­way. In places it broad­ened in­to wide ar­eas like small lakes; and at oth­ers it split in­to nar­row chan­nels, on­ly to com­bine again un­pre­dictably. It was quite un­like the bru­tal, ra­tio­nal way roads in Will’s world sliced through hill­sides and leapt across val­leys on bridges of con­crete. This was part of the land­scape, not an im­po­si­tion on it.

They were go­ing faster and faster. It took Will and Lyra a while to get used to the liv­ing im­pulse of the mus­cles and the shud­der­ing thun­der of the hard wheels on the hard stone. Lyra found it more dif­fi­cult than Will at first, be­cause she had nev­er rid­den a bi­cy­cle, and she didn’t know the trick of lean­ing in­to the cor­ner; but she saw how he was do­ing it, and soon she was find­ing the speed ex­hil­arat­ing.

The wheels made too much noise for them to speak. In­stead, they had to point: at the trees, in amaze­ment at their size and splen­dor; at a flock of birds, the strangest they had ev­er seen, their fore and aft wings giv­ing them a twist­ing, screw­ing mo­tion through the air; at a fat blue lizard as long as a horse bask­ing in the very mid­dle of the road (the wheeled crea­tures di­vid­ed to ride on ei­ther side of it, and it took no no­tice at all).

The sun was high in the sky when they be­gan to slow down.

And in the air, un­mis­tak­able, was the salt smell of the sea. The road was ris­ing to­ward a bluff, and present­ly they were mov­ing no faster than a walk.

Lyra, stiff and sore, said, “Can you stop? I want to get off and walk.”

Her crea­ture felt the tug at the bri­dle, and whether or not he un­der­stood her words, he came to a halt. Will’s did, too, and both chil­dren climbed down, find­ing them­selves stiff and shak­en af­ter the con­tin­ued jolt­ing and tens­ing.

The crea­tures wheeled around to talk to­geth­er, their trunks mov­ing el­egant­ly in time with the sounds they made. Af­ter a minute they moved on, and Will and Lyra were hap­py to walk among the hayscent­ed, grass­warm crea­tures who trun­dled be­side them. One or two had gone on ahead to the top of the rise, and the chil­dren, now that they no longer had to con­cen­trate on hang­ing on, were able to watch how they moved, and ad­mire the grace and pow­er with which they pro­pelled them­selves for­ward and leaned and turned.

As they came to the top of the rise, they stopped, and Will and Lyra heard the lead­er say, “Mary close. Mary there.”

They looked down. On the hori­zon there was the blue gleam of the sea. A broad, slow­mov­ing riv­er wound through rich grass­land in the mid­dle dis­tance, and at the foot of the long slope, among copses of small trees and rows of veg­eta­bles, stood a vil­lage of thatched hous­es. More crea­tures like these moved about among the hous­es, or tend­ed crops, or worked among the trees.

“Now ride again,” said the lead­er.

There wasn’t far to go. Will and Lyra climbed up once more, and the oth­er crea­tures looked close­ly at their bal­an­ce and checked the stir­rups with their trunks, as if to make sure they were safe.

Then they set off, beat­ing the road with their lat­er­al limbs, and urg­ing them­selves for­ward down the slope un­til they were mov­ing at a ter­rif­ic pace. Will and Lyra clung tight with hands and knees. They felt the air whip past their faces, fling­ing their hair back and press­ing on their eye­balls. The thun­der­ing of the wheels, the rush of the grass­land on ei­ther side, the sure and pow­er­ful lean in­to the broad curve ahead, the clear­head­ed rap­ture of speed, the crea­tures loved this, and Will and Lyra felt their joy and laughed in hap­py re­sponse.

They stopped in the cen­ter of the vil­lage, and the oth­ers, who had seen them com­ing, gath­ered around rais­ing their trunks and speak­ing words of wel­come.

And then Lyra cried, “Dr. Mal­one!”

Mary had come out of one of the huts, her fad­ed blue shirt, her stocky fig­ure, her warm, rud­dy cheeks both strange and fa­mil­iar.

Lyra ran and em­braced her, and the wom­an hugged her tight, and Will stood back, care­ful and doubt­ful.

Mary kissed Lyra warm­ly and then came for­ward to wel­come Will. And then came a cu­ri­ous lit­tle men­tal dance of sym­pa­thy and awk­ward­ness, which took place in a sec­ond or less.

Moved by com­pas­sion for the state they were in, Mary first meant to em­brace him as well as Lyra. But Mary was grown up, and Will was near­ly grown, and she could see that that kind of re­sponse would have made a child of him, be­cause while she might have em­braced a child, she would nev­er have done that to a man she didn’t know; so she drew back men­tal­ly, want­ing above all to hon­or this friend of Lyra’s and not cause him to lose face.

So in­stead she held out her hand and he shook it, and a cur­rent of un­der­stand­ing and re­spect passed be­tween them, so pow­er­ful that it be­came lik­ing at once and each of them felt that they had made a life­long friend, as in­deed they had.

“This is Will,” said Lyra, “he’s from your world, re­mem­ber, I told you about him…

“I’m Mary Mal­one,” she said, “and you’re hun­gry, the pair of you, you look half­starved.”

She turned to the crea­ture by her side and spoke some of those singing, hoot­ing sounds, mov­ing her arm as she did so.

At once the crea­tures moved away, and some of them brought cush­ions and rugs from the near­est house and laid them on the firm soil un­der a tree near­by, whose dense leaves and lowhang­ing branch­es gave a cool and fra­grant shade.

And as soon as they were com­fort­able, their hosts brought smooth wood­en bowls brim­ming with milk, which had a faint lemo­ny as­trin­gen­cy and was won­der­ful­ly re­fresh­ing; and small nuts like hazels, but with a rich­er but­tery taste; and sal­ad plucked fresh from the soil, sharp, pep­pery leaves min­gled with soft, thick ones that oozed a creamy sap, and lit­tle cher­ry­sized roots tast­ing like sweet car­rots.

But they couldn’t eat much. It was too rich. Will want­ed to do jus­tice to their gen­eros­ity, but the on­ly thing he could eas­ily sw­al­low, apart from the drink, was some flat, slight­ly scorched floury bread like cha­patis or tor­tillas. It was plain and nour­ish­ing, and that was all Will could cope with. Lyra tried some of ev­ery­thing, but like Will she soon found that a lit­tle was quite enough.

Mary man­aged to avoid ask­ing any ques­tions. These two had passed through an ex­pe­ri­ence that had marked them deeply; they didn’t want to talk about it yet.

So she an­swered their ques­tions about the mule­fa, and told them briefly how she had ar­rived in this world; and then she left them un­der the shade of the tree, be­cause she could see their eye­lids droop­ing and their heads nod­ding.

“You don’t have to do any­thing now but sleep,” she said.

The af­ter­noon air was warm and still, and the shade of the tree was drowsy and mur­murous with crick­ets. Less than five min­utes af­ter they’d sw­al­lowed the last of the drink, both Will and Lyra were fast asleep.

They are of two sex­es? said Atal, sur­prised. But how can you tell?

It’s easy, said Mary. Their bod­ies are dif­fer­ent shapes. They move dif­fer­ent­ly.

They are not much small­er than you. But they have less sraf. When will that come to them?

I don’t know, Mary said. I sup­pose some­time soon. I don’t know when it hap­pens to us.

No wheels, said Atal sym­pa­thet­ical­ly.

They were weed­ing the veg­etable gar­den. Mary had made a hoe to save hav­ing to bend down; Atal used her trunk, so their con­ver­sa­tion was in­ter­mit­tent.

But you knew they were com­ing, said Atal.

Yes.

Was it the sticks that told you?

No, said Mary, blush­ing. She was a sci­en­tist; it was bad enough to have to ad­mit to con­sult­ing the I Ching, but this was even more em­bar­rass­ing. It was a night pic­ture, she con­fessed.

The mule­fa had no sin­gle word for dream. They dreamed vivid­ly, though, and took their dreams very se­ri­ous­ly.

You don’t like night pic­tures, Atal said.

Yes, I do. But I didn’t be­lieve them un­til now. I saw the boy and the girl so clear­ly, and a voice told me to pre­pare for them.

What sort of voice? How did it speak if you couldn’t see it?

It was hard for Atal to imag­ine speech with­out the trunk move­ments that clar­ified and de­fined it. She’d stopped in the mid­dle of a row of beans and faced Mary with fas­ci­nat­ed cu­rios­ity.

Well, I did see it, said Mary. It was a wom­an, or a fe­male wise one, like us, like my peo­ple. But very old and yet not old at all.

Wise one was what the mule­fa called their lead­ers. She saw that Atal was look­ing in­tense­ly in­ter­est­ed.

How could she be old and al­so not old? said Atal.

It is a make­like, said Mary.

Atal swung her trunk, re­as­sured.

Mary went on as best she could: She told me that I should ex­pect the chil­dren, and when they would ap­pear, and where. But not why. I must just look af­ter them.

They are hurt and tired, said Atal. Will they stop the sraf leav­ing?

Mary looked up un­easi­ly. She knew with­out hav­ing to check through the spy­glass that the shad­ow par­ti­cles were stream­ing away faster than ev­er.

I hope so, she said. But I don’t know how.

In the ear­ly evening, when the cook­ing fires were lit and the first stars were com­ing out, a group of strangers ar­rived. Mary was wash­ing; she heard the thun­der of their wheels and the ag­itat­ed mur­mur of their talk, and hur­ried out of her house, dry­ing her­self.

Will and Lyra had been asleep all af­ter­noon, and they were just stir­ring now, hear­ing the noise. Lyra sat up grog­gi­ly to see Mary talk­ing to five or six of the mule­fa, who were sur­round­ing her, clear­ly ex­cit­ed; but whether they were an­gry or joy­ful, she couldn’t tell.

Mary saw her and broke away.

“Lyra,” she said, “some­thing’s hap­pened, they’ve found some­thing they can’t ex­plain and it’s… I don’t know what it is… I’ve got to go and look. It’s an hour or so away. I’ll come back as soon as I can. Help your­self to any­thing you need from my house, I can’t stop, they’re too anx­ious…

“All right,” said Lyra, still dazed from her long sleep.

Mary looked un­der the tree. Will was rub­bing his eyes.

“I re­al­ly won’t be too long,” she said. “Atal will stay with you.”

The lead­er was im­pa­tient. Mary swift­ly threw her bri­dle and stir­rups over his back, ex­cus­ing her­self for be­ing clum­sy, and mount­ed at once. They wheeled and turned and drove away in­to the dusk.

They set off in a new di­rec­tion, along the ridge above the coast to the north. Mary had nev­er rid­den in the dark be­fore, and she found the speed even more alarm­ing than by day. As they climbed, she could see the glit­ter of the moon on the sea far off to the left, and its sil­versepia light seemed to en­vel­op her in a cool, skep­ti­cal won­der. The won­der was in her, and the skep­ti­cism was in the world, and the cool­ness was in both.

She looked up from time to time and touched the spy­glass in her pock­et, but she couldn’t use it till they’d stopped mov­ing. And these mule­fa were mov­ing ur­gent­ly, with the air of not want­ing to stop for any­thing. Af­ter an hour’s hard rid­ing they swung in­land, leav­ing the stone road and mov­ing slow­ly along a trail of beat­en earth that ran be­tween knee­high grass past a stand of wheel trees and up to­ward a ridge. The land­scape glowed un­der the moon: wide, bare hills with oc­ca­sion­al lit­tle gul­lies, where streams trick­led down among the trees that clus­tered there.

It was to­ward one of these gul­lies that they led her. She had dis­mount­ed when they left the road, and she walked stea­di­ly at their pace over the brow of the hill and down in­to the gul­ly.

She heard the trick­ling of the spring, and the night wind in the grass. She heard the qui­et sound of the wheels crunch­ing over the hard­packed earth, and she heard the mule­fa ahead of her mur­mur­ing to one an­oth­er, and then they stopped.

In the side of the hill, just a few yards away, was one of those open­in­gs made by the sub­tle knife. It was like the mouth of a cave, be­cause the moon­light shone in­to it a lit­tle way, just as if in­side the open­ing there were the in­side of the hill; but it wasn’t. And out of it was com­ing a pro­ces­sion of ghosts.

Mary felt as if the ground had giv­en way be­neath her mind. She caught her­self with a start, seiz­ing the near­est branch for re­as­sur­an­ce that there still was a phys­ical world, and she was still part of it.

She moved clos­er. Old men and wom­en, chil­dren, babes in arms, hu­mans and oth­er be­in­gs, too, more and more thick­ly they came out of the dark in­to the world of sol­id moon­light, and van­ished.

That was the strangest thing. They took a few steps in the world of grass and air and sil­ver light, and looked around, their faces trans­formed with joy, Mary had nev­er seen such joy, and held out their arms as if they were em­brac­ing the whole uni­verse; and then, as if they were made of mist or smoke, they sim­ply drift­ed away, be­com­ing part of the earth and the dew and the night breeze.

Some of them came to­ward Mary as if they want­ed to tell her some­thing, and reached out their hands, and she felt their touch like lit­tle shocks of cold. One of the ghosts, an old wom­an, beck­oned, urg­ing her to come close.

Then she spoke, and Mary heard her say:

“Tell them sto­ries. They need the truth. You must tell them true sto­ries, and ev­ery­thing will be well, just tell them sto­ries.”

That was all, and then she was gone. It was one of those mo­ments when we sud­den­ly re­call a dream that we’ve un­ac­count­ably for­got­ten, and back in a flood comes all the emo­tion we felt in our sleep. It was the dream she’d tried to de­scribe to Atal, the night pic­ture; but as Mary tried to find it again, it dis­solved and drift­ed apart, just as these pres­ences did in the open air. The dream was gone.

All that was left was the sweet­ness of that feel­ing, and the in­junc­tion to tell them sto­ries.

She looked in­to the dark­ness. As far as she could see in­to that end­less si­lence, more of these ghosts were com­ing, thou­sands up­on thou­sands, like refugees re­turn­ing to their home­land.

“Tell them sto­ries,” she said to her­self.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-THREE MARZIPAN


Next morn­ing Lyra woke up from a dream in which Pan­ta­lai­mon had come back to her and re­vealed his fi­nal shape; and she had loved it, but now she had no idea what it was.

The sun hadn’t long risen, and the air had a fresh bloom. She could see the sun­light through the open door of the lit­tle thatched hut she slept in, Mary’s house. She lay for a while lis­ten­ing. There were birds out­side, and some kind of crick­et, and Mary was breath­ing qui­et­ly in her sleep near­by.

Lyra sat up and found her­self naked. She was in­dig­nant for a mo­ment, and then she saw some clean clothes fold­ed be­side her on the floor: a shirt of Mary’s, a length of soft, light pat­terned cloth that she could tie in­to a skirt. She put them on, feel­ing swamped in the shirt, but at least de­cent.

She left the hut. Pan­ta­lai­mon was near­by; she was sure of it. She could al­most hear him talk­ing and laugh­ing. It must mean that he was safe, and they were still con­nect­ed some­how. And when he for­gave her and came back, the hours they’d spend just talk­ing, just telling each oth­er ev­ery­thing…

Will was still asleep un­der the shel­ter tree, the lazy thing. Lyra thought of wak­ing him up, but if she was on her own, she could swim in the riv­er. She hap­pi­ly used to swim naked in the riv­er Cher­well with all the oth­er Ox­ford chil­dren, but it would be quite dif­fer­ent with Will, and she blushed even to think of it.

So she went down to the wa­ter alone in the pearl­col­ored morn­ing. Among the reeds at the edge there was a tall, slen­der bird like a heron, stand­ing per­fect­ly still on one leg.

She walked qui­et­ly and slow­ly so as not to dis­turb it, but the bird took no more no­tice of her than if she’d been a twig on the wa­ter.

“Well,” she said.

She left the clothes on the bank and slipped in­to the riv­er. It was sea­wa­ter com­ing in on the tide, and it was strange to Lyra, who had nev­er swum in salt wa­ter be­fore. She swam hard to keep warm, and then came out and hud­dled on the bank, shiv­er­ing. Pan would help dry her, nor­mal­ly. Was he a fish, laugh­ing at her from un­der the wa­ter? Or a bee­tle, creep­ing in­to the clothes to tick­le her, or a bird? Or was he some­where else en­tire­ly with the oth­er dae­mon, and with Lyra not on his mind at all? “‘”‘

The sun was warm now, and she was soon dry. She dressed in ,c Mary’s loose shirt again and, see­ing some flat stones by the bank, went to fetch her own clothes to wash them. But she found that some­one had al­ready done that: hers and Will’s, too, were laid over the springy twigs of a fra­grant bush, near­ly dry.

Will was stir­ring. She sat near­by and called him soft­ly.

“Will! Wake up!”

“Where are we?” he said at once, and sat up, reach­ing for the knife.

“Safe,” she said, look­ing away. “And they washed our clothes, too, or Dr. Mal­one did. I’ll get yours. They’re near­ly dry…”

She passed them in through the cur­tain of leaves and sat with her back to him till he was dressed.

“I swam in the riv­er,” she said. “I went to look for Pan, but I think he’s hid­ing.”

“That’s a good idea. I mean a swim. I feel as if I’ve got years and years of dirt on me… I’ll go down and wash.”

While he was gone, Lyra wan­dered around the vil­lage, not look­ing too close­ly at any­thing in case she broke some code of po­lite­ness, but cu­ri­ous about ev­ery­thing she saw. Some of the hous­es were very old and some quite new, hut they were all built in much the same way out of wood and clay and thatch. There was noth­ing crude about them; each door and win­dow frame and lin­tel was cov­ered in sub­tle pat­terns, but pat­terns that weren’t carved in the wood: it was as if they’d per­suad­ed the wood to grow in that shape nat­ural­ly.

The more she looked, the more she saw all kinds of or­der and care­ful­ness in the vil­lage, like the lay­ers of mean­ing in the alethiome­ter. Part of her mind was ea­ger to puz­zle it all out, to step light­ly from sim­ilar­ity to sim­ilar­ity, from one mean­ing to an­oth­er as she did with the in­stru­ment; but an­oth­er part was won­der­ing how long they’d be able to stay here be­fore they had to move on.

Well, I’m not go­ing any­where till Pan comes back, she said to her­self.

Present­ly Will came up from the riv­er, and then Mary came out of her house and of­fered them break­fast; and soon Atal came along, too, and the vil­lage came to life around them. The young mule­fa chil­dren, with­out wheels, kept peep­ing around the edges of their hous­es to stare, and Lyra would sud­den­ly turn and look at them di­rect­ly to make them jump and laugh with ter­ror.

“Well, now,” Mary said when they’d eat­en some bread and fruit and drunk a scald­ing in­fu­sion of some­thing like mint. “Yes­ter­day you were too tired and all you could do was rest. But you look a lot more live­ly to­day, both of you, and I think we need to tell each oth­er ev­ery­thing we’ve found out. And it’ll take us a good long time, and we might as well keep our hands busy while we’re do­ing it, so we’ll make our­selves use­ful and mend some nets.”

They car­ried the pile of stiff tar­ry net­ting to the riv­er­bank and spread it out on the grass, and Mary showed them how to knot a new piece of cord where it was worn. She was wary, be­cause Atal had told her that the fam­ilies far­ther along the coast had seen large num­bers of the tu­alapi, the white birds, gath­er­ing out at sea, and ev­ery­one was pre­pared for a warn­ing to leave at once; but work had to go on in the mean­time.

So they sat work­ing in the sun by the placid riv­er, and Lyra told her sto­ry, from the mo­ment so long ago when she and Pan de­cid­ed to look in the Re­tir­ing Room at Jor­dan Col­lege.

The tide came in and turned, and still there was no sign of the tu­alapi. In the late af­ter­noon Mary took Will and Lyra along the riv­er­bank, past the fish­ing posts where the nets were tied, and through the wide salt marsh to­ward the sea. It was safe to go there when the tide was out, be­cause the white birds on­ly came in­land when the wa­ter was high. Mary led the way along a hard path above the mud; like many things the mule­fa had made, it was an­cient and per­fect­ly main­tained, more like a part of na­ture than some­thing im­posed on it.

“Did they make the stone roads?” Will said.

“No. I think the roads made them, in a way,” Mary said. “I mean they’d nev­er have de­vel­oped the use of the wheels if there hadn’t been plen­ty of hard, flat sur­faces to use them on. I think they’re la­vaflows from an­cient vol­ca­noes.

“So the roads made it pos­si­ble for them to use the wheels. And oth­er things came to­geth­er as well. Like the wheel trees them­selves, and the way their bod­ies are formed, they’re not ver­te­brates, they don’t have a spine. Some lucky chance in our worlds long ago must have meant that crea­tures with back­bones had it a bit eas­ier, so all kinds of oth­er shapes de­vel­oped, all based on the cen­tral spine. In this world, chance went an­oth­er way, and the di­amond frame was suc­cess­ful. There are ver­te­brates, to be sure, but not many. There are snakes, for ex­am­ple. Snakes are im­por­tant here. The peo­ple look af­ter them and try not to hurt them.

“Any­way, their shape, and the roads, and the wheel trees com­ing to­geth­er all made it pos­si­ble. A lot of lit­tle chances, all com­ing to­geth­er. When did your part of the sto­ry be­gin, Will?”

“Lots of lit­tle chances for me, too,” he be­gan, think­ing of the cat un­der the horn­beam trees. If he’d ar­rived there thir­ty sec­onds ear­li­er or lat­er, he would nev­er have seen the cat, nev­er have found the win­dow, nev­er have dis­cov­ered Cit­tagazze and Lyra; none of this would have hap­pened.

He start­ed from the very be­gin­ning, and they lis­tened as they walked. By the time they reached the mud­flats, he had reached the point where he and his fa­ther were fight­ing on the moun­tain­top.

“And then the witch killed him…”

He had nev­er re­al­ly un­der­stood that. He ex­plained what she’d told him be­fore she killed her­self: she had loved John Par­ry, and he had scorned her.

“Witch­es are fierce, though,” Lyra said.

“But if she loved him…”

“Well,” said Mary, “love is fe­ro­cious, too.”

“But he loved my moth­er,” said Will. “And I can tell her that he was nev­er un­faith­ful.”

Lyra, look­ing at Will, thought that if he fell in love, he would be like that.

All around them the qui­et nois­es of the af­ter­noon hung in the warm air: the end­less trick­ling suck­ing of the marsh, the scrap­ing of in­sects, the call­ing of gulls. The tide was ful­ly out, so the whole ex­tent of the beach was clear and glis­ten­ing un­der the bright sun. A bil­li­on tiny mud crea­tures lived and ate and died in the top lay­er of sand, and the lit­tle casts and breath­ing holes and in­vis­ible move­ments showed that the whole land­scape was aquiver with life.

With­out telling the oth­ers why, Mary looked out to the dis­tant sea, scan­ning the hori­zon for white sails. But there was on­ly hazy glit­ter where the blue of the sky paled at the edge of the sea, and the sea took up the pal­lor and made it sparkle through the shim­mer­ing air.

She showed Will and Lyra how to gath­er a par­tic­ular kind of mol­lusk by find­ing their breath­ing tubes just above the sand. The mule­fa loved them, but it was hard for them to move on the sand and gath­er them. When­ev­er Mary came to the shore, she har­vest­ed as many as she could, and now with three pairs of hands and eyes at work, there would be a feast.

She gave each of them a cloth bag, and they worked as they lis­tened to the next part of the sto­ry. Stea­di­ly they filled their bags, and Mary led them un­ob­tru­sive­ly back to the edge of the marsh, for the tide was turn­ing.

The sto­ry was tak­ing a long time; they wouldn’t get to the world of the dead that day. As they neared the vil­lage, Will was telling Mary what he had learned about dae­mons and ghosts. Mary was par­tic­ular­ly in­ter­est­ed in the three­part na­ture of hu­man be­in­gs.

“You know,” she said, “the Church, the Catholic Church that I used to be­long to, wouldn’t use the word dae­mon, but St. Paul talks about spir­it and soul and body. So the idea of three parts in hu­man na­ture isn’t so strange.”

“But the best part is the body,” Will said. “That’s what Baruch and Balthamos told me. An­gels wish they had bod­ies. They told me that an­gels can’t un­der­stand why we don’t en­joy the world more. It would be sort of ec­sta­sy for them to have our flesh and our sens­es. In the world of the dead…

“Tell it when we get to it,” said Lyra, and she smiled at him, a smile of such sweet knowl­edge and joy that his sens­es felt con­fused. He smiled back, and Mary thought his ex­pres­sion showed more per­fect trust than she’d ev­er seen on a hu­man face.

By this time they had reached the vil­lage, and there was the evening meal to pre­pare. So Mary left the oth­er two by the riv­er­bank, where they sat to watch the tide flood­ing in, and went to join Atal by the cook­ing fire. Her friend was over­joyed by the shell­fish har­vest.

But Mary, she said, the tu­alapi de­stroyed a vil­lage fur­ther up the coast, and then an­oth­er and an­oth­er. They’ve nev­er done that be­fore. They usu­al­ly at­tack one and then go back to sea. And an­oth­er tree fell to­day …

No! Where!

Atal men­tioned a grove not far from a hot spring. Mary had been there on­ly three days be­fore, and noth­ing had seemed wrong. She took the spy­glass and looked at the sky; sure enough, the great stream of shad­ow par­ti­cles was flow­ing more strong­ly, and at in­com­pa­ra­bly greater speed and vol­ume, than the tide now ris­ing be­tween the riv­er­banks.

What can you do? said Atal.

Mary felt the weight of re­spon­si­bil­ity like a heavy hand be­tween her shoul­der blades, but made her­self sit up light­ly.

Tell them sto­ries, she said.

When sup­per was over, the three hu­mans and Atal sat on rugs out­side Mary’s house, un­der the warm stars. They lay back, well fed and com­fort­able in the flow­er­scent­ed night, and lis­tened to Mary tell her sto­ry.

She be­gan just be­fore she first met Lyra, telling them about the work she was do­ing at the Dark Mat­ter Re­search group, and the fund­ing cri­sis. How much time she’d had to spend ask­ing for mon­ey, and how lit­tle time there’d been left for re­search!

But Lyra’s com­ing had changed ev­ery­thing, and so quick­ly: with­in a mat­ter of days she’d left her world al­to­geth­er.

“I did as you told me,” she said. “I made a pro­gram, that’s a set of in­struc­tions, to let the Shad­ows talk to me through the com­put­er. They told me what to do. They said they were an­gels, and, well…”

“If you were a sci­en­tist,” said Will, “I don’t sup­pose that was a good thing for them to say. You might not have be­lieved in an­gels.”

“Ah, but I knew about them. I used to be a nun, you see. I thought physics could be done to the glo­ry of God, till I saw there wasn’t any God at all and that physics was more in­ter­est­ing any­way. The Chris­tian re­li­gion is a very pow­er­ful and con­vinc­ing mis­take, that’s all.”

“When did you stop be­ing a nun?” said Lyra.

“I re­mem­ber it ex­act­ly,” Mary said, “even to the time of day. Be­cause I was good at physics, they let me keep up my uni­ver­si­ty ca­reer, you see, and I fin­ished my doc­tor­ate and I was go­ing to teach. It wasn’t one of those or­ders where they shut you away from the world. In fact, we didn’t even wear the habit; we just had to dress sober­ly and wear a cru­ci­fix. So I was go­ing in­to uni­ver­si­ty to teach and do re­search in­to par­ti­cle physics.

“And there was a con­fer­ence on my sub­ject and they asked me to come and read a pa­per. The con­fer­ence was in Lis­bon, and I’d nev­er been there be­fore; in fact, I’d nev­er been out of Eng­land. The whole busi­ness, the plane flight, the ho­tel, the bright sun­light, the for­eign lan­guages all around me, the well­known peo­ple who were go­ing to speak, and the thought of my own pa­per and won­der­ing whether any­one would turn up to lis­ten and whether I’d be too ner­vous to get the words out… Oh, I was keyed up with ex­cite­ment, I can’t tell you.

“And I was so in­no­cent, you have to re­mem­ber that. I’d been such a good lit­tle girl, I’d gone to Mass reg­ular­ly, I’d thought I had a vo­ca­tion for the spir­itu­al life. I want­ed to serve God with all my heart. I want­ed to take my whole life and of­fer it up like this,” she said, hold­ing up her hands to­geth­er, “and place it in front of Je­sus to do as he liked with. And I sup­pose I was pleased with my­self. Too much. I was holy and I was clever. Ha! That last­ed un­til, oh, half past nine on the evening of Au­gust the tenth, sev­en years ago.”

Lyra sat up and hugged her knees, lis­ten­ing close­ly.

“It was the evening af­ter I’d giv­en my pa­per,” Mary went on, “and it had gone well, and there’d been some well­known peo­ple lis­ten­ing, and I’d dealt with the ques­tions with­out mak­ing a mess of it, and al­to­geth­er I was full of re­lief and plea­sure… And pride, too, no doubt.

“Any­way, some of my col­leagues were go­ing to a restau­rant a lit­tle way down the coast, and they asked if I’d like to go. Nor­mal­ly I’d have made some ex­cuse, but this time I thought, Well, I’m a grown wom­an, I’ve pre­sent­ed a pa­per on an im­por­tant sub­ject and it was well re­ceived and I’m among good friends… And it was so warm, and the talk was about all the things I was most in­ter­est­ed in, and we were all in high spir­its, so I thought I’d loosen up a bit. I was dis­cov­er­ing an­oth­er side of my­self, you know, one that liked the taste of wine and grilled sar­dines and the feel­ing of warm air on my skin and the beat of mu­sic in the back­ground. I rel­ished it.

“So we sat down to eat in the gar­den. I was at the end of a long ta­ble un­der a lemon tree, and there was a sort of bow­er next to me with pas­sion­flow­ers, and my neigh­bor was talk­ing to the per­son on the oth­er side, and… Well, sit­ting op­po­site was a man I’d seen once or twice around the con­fer­ence. I didn’t know him to speak to; he was Ital­ian, and he’d done some work that peo­ple were talk­ing about, and I thought it would be in­ter­est­ing to hear about it.

“Any­way. He was on­ly a lit­tle old­er than me, and he had soft black hair and beau­ti­ful olivecol­ored skin and dark, dark eyes. His hair kept falling across his fore­head and he kept push­ing it back like that, slow­ly…”

She showed them. Will thought she looked as if she re­mem­bered it very well.

“He wasn’t hand­some,” she went on. “He wasn’t a ladies’ man or a charmer. If he had been, I’d have been shy, I wouldn’t have known how to talk to him. But he was nice and clever and fun­ny and it was the eas­iest thing in the world to sit there in the lantern light un­der the lemon tree with the scent of the flow­ers and the grilled food and the wine, and talk and laugh and feel my­self hop­ing that he thought I was pret­ty. Sis­ter Mary Mal­one, flirt­ing! What about my vows? What about ded­icat­ing my life to Je­sus and all that?

“Well, I don’t know if it was the wine or my own sil­li­ness or the warm air or the lemon tree, or what­ev­er…But it grad­ual­ly seemed to me that I’d made my­self be­lieve some­thing that wasn’t true. I’d made my­self be­lieve that I was fine and hap­py and ful­filled on my own with­out the love of any­one else. Be­ing in love was like Chi­na: you knew it was there, and no doubt it was very in­ter­est­ing, and some peo­ple went there, but I nev­er would. I’d spend all my life with­out ev­er go­ing to Chi­na, but it wouldn’t mat­ter, be­cause there was all the rest of the world to vis­it.

“And then some­one passed me a bit of some sweet stuff and I sud­den­ly re­al­ized I had been to Chi­na. So to speak. And I’d for­got­ten it. It was the taste of the sweet stuff that brought it back, I think it was marzi­pan. Sweet al­mond paste,” she ex­plained to Lyra, who was look­ing con­fused.

Lyra said, “Ah! March­pane!” and set­tled back com­fort­ably to hear what hap­pened next.

“Any­way,” Mary went on. “I re­mem­bered the taste, and all at once I was back tast­ing it for the first time as a young girl.

“I was twelve years old. I was at a par­ty at the house of one of my friends, a birth­day par­ty, and there was a dis­co, that’s where they play mu­sic on a kind of record­ing ma­chine and peo­ple dance,” she ex­plained, see­ing Lyra’s puz­zle­ment. “Usu­al­ly girls dance to­geth­er be­cause the boys are too shy to ask them. But this boy, I didn’t know him, he asked me to dance, and so we had the first dance and then the next, and by that time we were talk­ing… And you know what it is when you like some­one, you know it at once; well, I liked him such a lot. And we kept on talk­ing and then there was a birth­day cake. And he took a bit of marzi­pan and he just gen­tly put it in my mouth, I re­mem­ber try­ing to smile, and blush­ing, and feel­ing so fool­ish, and I fell in love with him just for that, for the gen­tle way he touched my lips with the marzi­pan.”

As Mary said that, Lyra felt some­thing strange hap­pen to her body. She felt as if she had been hand­ed the key to a great house she hadn’t known was there, a house that was some­how in­side her, and as she turned the key, she felt oth­er doors open­ing deep in the dark­ness, and lights com­ing on. She sat trem­bling as Mary went on:

“And I think it was at that par­ty, or it might have been at an­oth­er one, that we kissed each oth­er for the first time. It was in a gar­den, and there was the sound of mu­sic from in­side, and the qui­et and the cool among the trees, and I was aching, all my body was aching for him, and I could tell he felt the same, and we were both al­most too shy to move. Al­most. But one of us did and then with­out any in­ter­val be­tween, it was like a quan­tum leap, sud­den­ly, we were kiss­ing each oth­er, and oh, it was more than Chi­na, it was par­adise.

“We saw each oth­er about half a dozen times, no more. And then his par­ents moved away and I nev­er saw him again. It was such a sweet time, so short… But there it was. I’d known it. I had been to Chi­na.”

It was the strangest thing: Lyra knew ex­act­ly what she meant, and half an hour ear­li­er she would have had no idea at all. And in­side her, that rich house with all its doors open and all its rooms lit stood wait­ing, qui­et, ex­pec­tant.

“And at half past nine in the evening at that restau­rant ta­ble in Por­tu­gal,” Mary con­tin­ued, “some­one gave me a piece of marzi­pan and it all came back. And I thought: am I re­al­ly go­ing to spend the rest of my life with­out ev­er feel­ing that again? I thought: I want to go to Chi­na. It’s full of trea­sures and strangeness and mys­tery and joy. I thought, Will any­one be bet­ter off if I go straight back to the ho­tel and say my prayers and con­fess to the priest and promise nev­er to fall in­to temp­ta­tion again? Will any­one be the bet­ter for mak­ing me mis­er­able?

“And the an­swer came back, no. No one will. There’s no one to fret, no one to con­demn, no one to bless me for be­ing a good girl, no one to pun­ish me for be­ing wicked. Heav­en was emp­ty. I didn’t know whether God had died, or whether there nev­er had been a God at all. Ei­ther way I felt free and lone­ly and I didn’t know whether I was hap­py or un­hap­py, but some­thing very strange had hap­pened. And all that huge change came about as I had the marzi­pan in my mouth, be­fore I’d even sw­al­lowed it. A taste, a mem­ory, a land­slide…

“When I did sw­al­low it and looked at the man across the ta­ble, I could tell he knew some­thing had hap­pened. I couldn’t tell him there and then; it was still too strange and pri­vate al­most for me. But lat­er on we went for a walk along the beach in the dark, and the warm night breeze kept stir­ring my hair about, and the At­lan­tic was be­ing very wellbe­haved, lit­tle qui­et waves around our feet…

“And I took the cru­ci­fix from around my neck and I threw it in the sea. That was it. All over. Gone.

“So that was how I stopped be­ing a nun,” she said.

“Was that man the same one that found out about the skulls?” Lyra said af­ter a mo­ment.

“Oh, no. The skull man was Dr. Payne, Oliv­er Payne. He came along much lat­er. No, the man at the con­fer­ence was called Al­fre­do Mon­tale. He was very dif­fer­ent.”

“Did you kiss him?”

“Well,” said Mary, smil­ing, “yes, but not then.”

“Was it hard to leave the Church?” said Will.

“In one way it was, be­cause ev­ery­one was so dis­ap­point­ed. Ev­ery­one, from the Moth­er Su­pe­ri­or to the priests to my par­ents, they were so up­set and re­proach­ful… I felt as if some­thing they all pas­sion­ate­ly be­lieved in de­pend­ed on me car­ry­ing on with some­thing I didn’t.

“But in an­oth­er way it was easy, be­cause it made sense. For the first time ev­er I felt I was do­ing some­thing with all of my na­ture and not on­ly a part of it. So it was lone­ly for a while, but then I got used to it.”

“Did you mar­ry him?” said Lyra.

“No. I didn’t mar­ry any­one. I lived with some­one, not Al­fre­do, some­one else. I lived with him for four years, near­ly. My fam­ily was scan­dal­ized. But then we de­cid­ed we’d be hap­pi­er not liv­ing to­geth­er. So I’m on my own. The man I lived with used to like moun­tain climb­ing, and he taught me to climb, and I walk in the moun­tains and… And I’ve got my work. Well, I had my work. So I’m soli­tary but hap­py, if you see what I mean.”

“What was the boy called?” said Lyra. “At the par­ty?”

“Tim.”

“What did he look like?”

“Oh… Nice. That’s all I re­mem­ber.”

“When I first saw you, in your Ox­ford,” Lyra said, “you said one of the rea­sons you be­came a sci­en­tist was that you wouldn’t have to think about good and evil. Did you think about them when you were a nun?”

“Hmm. No. But I knew what I should think: it was what­ev­er the Church taught me to think. And when I did sci­ence, I had to think about oth­er things al­to­geth­er. So I nev­er had to think about them for my­self at all.”

“But do you now?” said Will.

“I think I have to,” Mary said, try­ing to he ac­cu­rate.

“When you stopped be­liev­ing in God,” he went on, “did you stop be­liev­ing in good and evil?”

“No. But I stopped be­liev­ing there was a pow­er of good and a pow­er of evil that were out­side us. And I came to be­lieve that good and evil are names for what peo­ple do, not for what they are. All we can say is that this is a good deed, be­cause it helps some­one, or that’s an evil one, be­cause it hurts them. Peo­ple are too com­pli­cat­ed to have sim­ple la­bels.”

“Yes,” said Lyra firm­ly.

“Did you miss God?” asked Will.

“Yes,” Mary said, “ter­ri­bly. And I still do. And what I miss most is the sense of be­ing con­nect­ed to the whole of the uni­verse. I used to feel I was con­nect­ed to God like that, and be­cause he was there, I was con­nect­ed to the whole of his cre­ation. But if he’s not there, then…”

Far out on the marsh­es, a bird called with a long, melan­choly se­ries of falling tones. Em­bers set­tled in the fire; the grass was stir­ring faint­ly with the night breeze. Atal seemed to be doz­ing like a cat, her wheels flat on the grass be­side her, her legs fold­ed un­der her body, eyes half­closed, at­ten­tion halfthere and halfelse­where. Will was ly­ing on his back, eyes open to the stars.

As for Lyra, she hadn’t moved a mus­cle since that strange thing had hap­pened, and she held the mem­ory of the sen­sa­tion in­side her. She didn’t know what it was, or what it meant, or where it had come from; so she sat hug­ging her knees, and tried to stop her­self from trem­bling. Soon, she thought, soon I’ll know.

Mary was tired; she had run out of sto­ries. No doubt she’d think of more to­mor­row.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-FOUR - THERE IS NOW


Mary couldn’t sleep. Ev­ery time she closed her eyes, some­thing made her sway and lurch as if she were at the brink of a precipice, and she snapped awake, tense with fear.

This hap­pened three, four, five times, un­til she re­al­ized that sleep was not go­ing to come; so she got up and dressed qui­et­ly, and stepped out of the house and away from the tree with its tent­like branch­es un­der which Will and Lyra were sleep­ing.

The moon was bright and high in the sky. There was a live­ly wind, and the great land­scape was mot­tled with cloud­shad­ows, mov­ing, Mary thought, like the mi­gra­tion of some herd of unimag­in­able beasts. But an­imals mi­grat­ed for a pur­pose; when you saw herds of rein­deer mov­ing across the tun­dra, or wilde­beest cross­ing the sa­van­na, you knew they were go­ing where the food was, or to places where it was good to mate and bear off­spring. Their move­ment had a mean­ing. These clouds were mov­ing as the re­sult of pure chance, the ef­fect of ut­ter­ly ran­dom events at the lev­el of atoms and molecules; their shad­ows speed­ing over the grass­land had no mean­ing at all.

Nev­er­the­less, they looked as if they did. They looked tense and driv­en with pur­pose. The whole night did. Mary felt it, too, ex­cept that she didn’t know what that pur­pose was. But un­like her, the clouds seemed to know what they were do­ing and why, and the wind knew, and the grass knew. The en­tire world was alive and con­scious.

Mary climbed the slope and looked back across the marsh­es, where the in­com­ing tide laced a bril­liant sil­ver through the glis­ten­ing dark of the mud­flats and the reed beds. The cloud­shad­ows were very clear down there; they looked as if they were flee­ing some­thing fright­ful be­hind them, or has­ten­ing to em­brace some­thing won­der­ful ahead. But what that was, Mary would nev­er know.

She turned to­ward the grove where her climb­ing tree stood. It was twen­ty min­utes’ walk away; she could see it clear­ly, tow­er­ing high and toss­ing its great head in a di­alogue with the ur­gent wind. They had things to say, and she couldn’t hear them.

She hur­ried to­ward it, moved by the ex­cite­ment of the night, and des­per­ate to join in. This was the very thing she’d told Will about when he asked if she missed God: it was the sense that the whole uni­verse was alive, and that ev­ery­thing was con­nect­ed to ev­ery­thing else by threads of mean­ing. When she’d been a Chris­tian, she had felt con­nect­ed, too; but when she left the Church, she felt loose and free and light, in a uni­verse with­out pur­pose.

And then had come the dis­cov­ery of the Shad­ows and her jour­ney in­to an­oth­er world, and now this vivid night, and it was plain that ev­ery­thing was throb­bing with pur­pose and mean­ing, but she was cut off from it. And it was im­pos­si­ble to find a con­nec­tion, be­cause there was no God.

Half in ex­ul­ta­tion and half in de­spair, she re­solved to climb her tree and try once again to lose her­self in the Dust.

But be­fore she’d even gone halfway to the grove she heard a dif­fer­ent sound among the lash­ing of the leaves and the stream­ing of the wind through the grass. Some­thing was groan­ing, a deep, somber note like an or­gan. And above that, the sound of crack­ing, snap­ping and break­ing, and the squeal and scream of wood on wood.

Sure­ly it couldn’t be her tree?

She stopped where she was, in the open grass­land, with the wind lash­ing her face and the cloud­shad­ows rac­ing past her and the tall grass­es whip­ping her thighs, and watched the canopy of the grove. Boughs groaned, twigs snapped, great balks of green wood snapped off like dry sticks and fell all the long way to the ground, and then the crown it­self, the crown of the very tree she knew so well, leaned and leaned and slow­ly be­gan to top­ple.

Ev­ery fiber in the trunk, the bark, the roots seemed to cry out sep­arate­ly against this mur­der. But it fell and fell, all the great length of it smashed its way out of the grove and seemed to lean to­ward Mary be­fore crash­ing in­to the ground like a wave against a break­wa­ter; and the co­los­sal trunk re­bound­ed up a lit­tle way, and set­tled down fi­nal­ly, with a groan­ing of torn wood.

She ran up to touch the toss­ing leaves. There was her rope; there were the splin­tered ru­ins of her plat­form. Her heart thud­ding painful­ly, she climbed in among the fall­en branch­es, haul­ing her­self through the fa­mil­iar boughs at their un­fa­mil­iar an­gles, and bal­an­ced her­self as high up as she could get.

She braced her­self against a branch and took out the spy­glass. Through it she saw two quite dif­fer­ent move­ments in the sky.

One was that of the clouds, driv­en across the moon in one di­rec­tion, and the oth­er was that of the stream of Dust, seem­ing to cross it in quite an­oth­er.

And of the two, the Dust was flow­ing more quick­ly and at much greater vol­ume. In fact, the whole sky seemed to be flow­ing with it, a great in­ex­orable flood pour­ing out of the world, out of all the worlds, in­to some ul­ti­mate emp­ti­ness.

Slow­ly, as if they were mov­ing them­selves in her mind, things joined up.

Will and Lyra had said that the sub­tle knife was three hun­dred years old at least. So the old man in the tow­er had told them.

The mule­fa had told her that the sraf, which had nur­tured their lives and their world for thir­tythree thou­sand years, had be­gun to fail just over three hun­dred years ago.

Ac­cord­ing to Will, the Guild of the Torre degli An­geli, the own­ers of the sub­tle knife, had been care­less; they hadn’t al­ways closed the win­dows they opened. Well, Mary had found one, af­ter all, and there must be many oth­ers.

Sup­pose that all this time, lit­tle by lit­tle, Dust had been leak­ing out of the wounds the sub­tle knife had made in na­ture…

She felt dizzy, and it wasn’t on­ly the sway­ing and ris­ing and falling of the branch­es she was wedged among. She put the spy­glass care­ful­ly in her pock­et and hooked her arms over the branch in front, gaz­ing at the sky, the moon, the scud­ding clouds.

The sub­tle knife was re­spon­si­ble for the smallscale, lowlev­el leak­age. It was dam­ag­ing, and the uni­verse was suf­fer­ing be­cause of it, and she must talk to Will and Lyra and find a way to stop it.

But the vast flood in the sky was an­oth­er mat­ter en­tire­ly. That was new, and it was catas­troph­ic. And if it wasn’t stopped, all con­scious life would come to an end. As the mule­fa had shown her, Dust came in­to be­ing when liv­ing things be­came con­scious of them­selves; but it need­ed some feed­back sys­tem to re­in­force it and make it safe, as the mule­fa had their wheels and the oil from the trees. With­out some­thing like that, it would all van­ish. Thought, imag­ina­tion, feel­ing, would all with­er and blow away, leav­ing noth­ing but a brutish au­toma­tism; and that brief pe­ri­od when life was con­scious of it­self would flick­er out like a can­dle in ev­ery one of the bil­li­ons of worlds where it had burned bright­ly.

Mary felt the bur­den of it keen­ly. It felt like age. She felt eighty years old, worn out and weary and long­ing to die.

She climbed heav­ily out of the branch­es of the great fall­en tree, and with the wind still wild in the leaves and the grass and her hair, set off hack to the vil­lage.

At the sum­mit of the slope she looked for the last time at the Dust stream, with the clouds and the wind blow­ing across it and the moon stand­ing firm in the mid­dle.

And then she saw what they were do­ing, at last: she saw what that great ur­gent pur­pose was.

They were try­ing to hold back the Dust flood. They were striv­ing to put some bar­ri­ers up against the ter­ri­ble stream: wind, moon, clouds, leaves, grass, all those love­ly things were cry­ing out and hurl­ing them­selves in­to the strug­gle to keep the shad­ow par­ti­cles in this uni­verse, which they so en­riched.

Mat­ter loved Dust. It didn’t want to see it go. That was the mean­ing of this night, and it was Mary’s mean­ing, too.

Had she thought there was no mean­ing in life, no pur­pose, when God had gone? Yes, she had thought that.

“Well, there is now,” she said aloud, and again, loud­er: “There is now!”

As she looked again at the clouds and the moon in the Dust flow, they looked as frail and doomed as a dam of lit­tle twigs and tiny peb­bles try­ing to hold back the Mis­sis­sip­pi. But they were try­ing, all the same. They’d go on try­ing till the end of ev­ery­thing.

How long she stayed out, Mary didn’t know. When the in­ten­si­ty of her feel­ing be­gan to sub­side, and ex­haus­tion took its place, she made her way slow­ly down the hill to­ward the vil­lage.

And when she was halfway down, near a lit­tle grove of knot­wood bush­es, she saw some­thing strange out on the mud­flats. There was a glow of white, a steady move­ment: some­thing com­ing up with the tide.

She stood still, gaz­ing in­tent­ly. It couldn’t be the tu­alapi, be­cause they al­ways moved in a flock, and this was on its own.

But ev­ery­thing about it was the same, the sail­like wings, the long neck, it was one of the birds, no doubt about it. She had nev­er heard of their mov­ing about alone, and she hes­itat­ed be­fore run­ning down to warn the vil­lagers, be­cause the thing had stopped, in any case. It was float­ing on the wa­ter close to the path.

And it was com­ing apart… No, some­thing was get­ting off its back.

The some­thing was a man.

She could see him quite clear­ly, even at that dis­tance; the moon­light was bril­liant, and her eyes were ad­just­ed to it. She looked through the spy­glass, and put the mat­ter be­yond doubt: it was a hu­man fig­ure, ra­di­at­ing Dust.

He was car­ry­ing some­thing: a long stick of some kind. He came along the path quick­ly and eas­ily, not run­ning, but mov­ing like an ath­lete or a hunter. He was dressed in sim­ple dark clothes that would nor­mal­ly con­ceal him well; but through the spy­glass he showed up as if he were un­der a spot­light.

And as he came clos­er to the vil­lage, she re­al­ized what that stick was. He was car­ry­ing a ri­fle.

She felt as if some­one had poured icy wa­ter over her heart. Ev­ery sep­arate hair on her flesh stirred.

She was too far away to do any­thing: even if she’d shout­ed, he wouldn’t have heard. She had to watch as he stepped in­to the vil­lage, look­ing to the left and right, stop­ping ev­ery so of­ten to lis­ten, mov­ing from house to house.

Mary’s mind felt like the moon and the clouds try­ing to hold back the Dust as she cried out silent­ly: Don’t look un­der the tree, go away from the tree …

But he moved clos­er and clos­er to it, fi­nal­ly stop­ping out­side her own house. She couldn’t bear it; she put the spy­glass in her pock­et and be­gan to run down the slope. She was about to call out, any­thing, a wild cry, but just in time she re­al­ized that it might wake Will or Lyra and make them re­veal them­selves, and she choked it back.

Then, be­cause she couldn’t bear not know­ing what the man was do­ing, she stopped and fum­bled for the spy­glass again, and had to stand still while she looked through it.

He was open­ing the door of her house. He was go­ing in­side it. He van­ished from sight, al­though there was a stir in the Dust he left be­hind, like smoke when a hand is passed through it. Mary wait­ed for an end­less minute, and then he ap­peared again.

He stood in her door­way, look­ing around slow­ly from left to right, and his gaze swept past the tree.

Then he stepped off the thresh­old and stood still, al­most at a loss. Mary was sud­den­ly con­scious of how ex­posed she was on the bare hill­side, an easy ri­fle shot away, but he was on­ly in­ter­est­ed in the vil­lage; and when an­oth­er minute or so had gone by, he turned and walked qui­et­ly away.

She watched ev­ery step he took down the riv­er path, and saw quite clear­ly how he stepped on­to the bird’s back and sat cross­legged as it turned to glide away. Five min­utes lat­er they were lost to sight.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-FIVE - OVER THE HILLS AND FAR AWAY


“Dr. Mal­one,” said Lyra in the morn­ing, “Will and me have got to look for our dae­mons. When we’ve found them, we’ll know what to do. But we can’t be with­out them for much longer. So we just want to go and look.”

“Where will you go?” said Mary, heavyeyed and headachy af­ter her dis­turbed night. She and Lyra were on the riv­er­bank, Lyra to wash, and Mary to look, sur­rep­ti­tious­ly, for the man’s foot­prints. So far she hadn’t found any.

“Don’t know,” said Lyra. “But they’re out there some­where. As soon as we came through from the bat­tle, they ran away as if they didn’t trust us any­more. Can’t say I blame them, ei­ther. But we know they’re in this world, and we thought we saw them a cou­ple of times, so maybe we can find them.”

“Lis­ten,” Mary said re­luc­tant­ly, and told Lyra about the man she’d seen the night be­fore.

As she spoke, Will came to join them, and both he and Lyra lis­tened, wideeyed and se­ri­ous.

“He’s prob­ably just a trav­el­er and he found a win­dow and wan­dered through from some­where else,” Lyra said when Mary had fin­ished. “Like Will’s fa­ther did. There’s bound to be all kinds of open­in­gs now. Any­way, if he just turned around and left, he can’t have meant to do any­thing bad, can he?”

“I don’t know. I didn’t like it. And I’m wor­ried about you go­ing off on your own, or I would be if I didn’t know you’d al­ready done far more dan­ger­ous things than that. Oh, I don’t know. But please be care­ful. Please look all around. At least out on the prairie you can see some­one com­ing from a long way off…”

“If we do, we can es­cape straight away in­to an­oth­er world, so he won’t he able to hurt us,” Will said.

They were de­ter­mined to go, and Mary was re­luc­tant to ar­gue.

“At least,” she said, “promise that you won’t go in among the trees. If that man is still around, he might be hid­ing in a wood or a grove and you wouldn’t see him in time to es­cape.”

“We promise,” said Lyra.

“Well, I’ll pack you some food in case you’re out all day.”

Mary took some flat bread and cheese and some sweet, thirstquench­ing red fruits, wrapped them in a cloth, and tied a cord around it for one of them to car­ry over a shoul­der.

“Good hunt­ing,” she said as they left. “Please take care.”

She was still anx­ious. She stood watch­ing them all the way to the foot of the slope.

“I won­der why she’s so sad,” Will said as he and Lyra climbed the road up to the ridge.

“She’s prob­ably won­der­ing if she’ll ev­er go home again,” said Lyra. “And if her lab­ora­to­ry’ll still be hers when she does. And maybe she’s sad about the man she was in love with.”

“Mmm,” said Will. “D’you think we’ll ev­er go home?”

“Dun­no. I don’t sup­pose I’ve got a home any­way. They prob­ably couldn’t have me back at Jor­dan Col­lege, and I can’t live with the bears or the witch­es. Maybe I could live with the gyp­tians. I wouldn’t mind that, if they’d have me.”

“What about Lord As­riel’s world? Wouldn’t you want to live there?”

“It’s go­ing to fail, re­mem­ber,” she said.

“Why?”

“Be­cause of what your fa­ther’s ghost said, just be­fore we came out. About dae­mons, and how they can on­ly live for a long time if they stay in their own world. But prob­ably Lord As­riel, I mean my fa­ther, couldn’t have thought about that, be­cause no one knew enough about oth­er worlds when he start­ed… All that,” she said won­der­ing­ly, “all that brav­ery and skill… All that, all wast­ed! All for noth­ing!”

They climbed on, find­ing the go­ing easy on the rock road, and when they reached the top of the ridge, they stopped and looked back.

“Will,” she said, “sup­pos­ing we don’t find them?”

“I’m sure we will. What I’m won­der­ing is what my dae­mon will be like.”

“You saw her. And I picked her up,” Lyra said, blush­ing, be­cause of course it was a gross vi­ola­tion of man­ners to touch some­thing so pri­vate as some­one else’s dae­mon. It was for­bid­den not on­ly by po­lite­ness, but by some­thing deep­er than that, some­thing like shame. A quick glance at Will’s warm cheeks showed that he knew that just as well as she did.

They walked on side by side, sud­den­ly shy with each oth­er. But Will, not put off by be­ing shy, said, “When does your dae­mon stop chang­ing shape?”

“About… I sup­pose about our age, or a bit old­er. Maybe more some­times. We used to talk about Pan set­tling, him and me. We used to won­der what he’d be…

“Don’t peo­ple have any idea?”

“Not when they’re young. As you grow up you start think­ing, well, they might be this or they might be that… And usu­al­ly they end up some­thing that fits. I mean some­thing like your re­al na­ture. Like if your dae­mon’s a dog, that means you like do­ing what you’re told, and know­ing who’s boss, and fol­low­ing or­ders, and pleas­ing peo­ple who are in charge. A lot of ser­vants are peo­ple whose dae­mons are dogs. So it helps to know what you’re like and to find what you’d be good at. How do peo­ple in your world know what they’re like?”

“I don’t know. I don’t know much about my world. All I know is keep­ing se­cret and qui­et and hid­den, so I don’t know much about… grownups, and friends. Or lovers. I think it’d be dif­fi­cult hav­ing a dae­mon be­cause ev­ery­body would know so much about you just by look­ing. I like to keep se­cret and stay out of sight.”

“Then maybe your dae­mon’d be an an­imal that’s good at hid­ing. Or one of those an­imals that looks like an­oth­er, a but­ter­fly that looks like a wasp, for dis­guise. They must have crea­tures like that in your world, be­cause we have, and we’re so much alike.”

They walked on to­geth­er in a friend­ly si­lence. All around them the wide, clear morn­ing lay limpid in the hol­lows and pearly blue in the warm air above. As far as the eye could see, the great sa­van­na rolled, brown, gold, buf­fgreen, shim­mer­ing to­ward the hori­zon, and emp­ty. They might have been the on­ly peo­ple in the world.

“But it’s not emp­ty re­al­ly,” Lyra said.

“You mean that man?”

“No. You know what I mean.”

“Yes, I do. I can see shad­ows in the grass… maybe birds,” Will said.

He was fol­low­ing the lit­tle dart­ing move­ments here and there. He found it eas­ier to see the shad­ows if he didn’t look at them. They were more will­ing to show them­selves to the cor­ners of his eye, and when he said so to Lyra, she said, “It’s neg­ative ca­pa­bil­ity.”

“What’s that?”

“The po­et Keats said it first. Dr. Mal­one knows. It’s how I read the alethiome­ter. It’s how you use the knife, isn’t it?”

“Yes, I sup­pose it is. But I was just think­ing that they might be the dae­mons.”

“So was I, but…”

She put her fin­ger to her lips. He nod­ded.

“Look,” he said, “there’s one of those fall­en trees.”

It was Mary’s climb­ing tree. They went up to it care­ful­ly, keep­ing an eye on the grove in case an­oth­er one should fall. In the calm morn­ing, with on­ly a faint breeze stir­ring the leaves, it seemed im­pos­si­ble that a mighty thing like this should ev­er top­ple, but here it was.

The vast trunk, sup­port­ed in the grove by its tor­nup roots and out on the grass by the mass of branch­es, was high above their heads. Some of those branch­es, crushed and bro­ken, were them­selves as big around as the biggest trees Will had ev­er seen; the crown of the tree, tight­packed with boughs that still looked stur­dy, leaves that were still green, tow­ered like a ru­in­ed palace in­to the mild air.

Sud­den­ly Lyra gripped Will’s arm.

“Shh,” she whis­pered. “Don’t look. I’m sure they’re up there. I saw some­thing move and I swear it was Pan…”

Her hand was warm. He was more aware of that than of the great mass of leaves and branch­es above them. Pre­tend­ing to gaze va­cant­ly at the hori­zon, he let his at­ten­tion wan­der up­ward in­to the con­fused mass of green, brown, and blue, and there, she was right! , there was a some­thing that was not the tree. And be­side it, an­oth­er.

“Walk away,” Will said un­der his breath. “We’ll go some­where else and see if they fol­low us.”

“Sup­pose they don’t… But yes, all right,” Lyra whis­pered back.

They pre­tend­ed to look all around; they set their hands on one of the branch­es rest­ing on the ground, as if they were in­tend­ing to climb; they pre­tend­ed to change their minds, by shak­ing their heads and walk­ing away.

“I wish we could look be­hind,” Lyra said when they were a few hun­dred yards away.

“Just go on walk­ing. They can see us, and they won’t get lost. They’ll come to us when they want to.”

They stepped off the black road and in­to the knee­high grass, swish­ing their legs through the stems, watch­ing the in­sects hov­er­ing, dart­ing, flut­ter­ing, skim­ming, hear­ing the mil­li­on­voiced cho­rus chirrup and scrape.

“What are you go­ing to do, Will?” Lyra said qui­et­ly af­ter they’d walked some way in si­lence.

“Well, I’ve got to go home,” he said.

She thought he sound­ed un­sure, though. She hoped he sound­ed un­sure.

“But they might still be af­ter you,” she said. “Those men.”

“We’ve seen worse than them, af­ter all.”

“Yes, I sup­pose… But I want­ed to show you Jor­dan Col­lege, and the Fens. I want­ed us to…”

“Yeah,” he said, “and I want­ed… It would be good to go to Cit­tagazze again, even. It was a beau­ti­ful place, and if the Specters are all gone… But there’s my moth­er. I’ve got to go back and look af­ter her. I just left her with Mrs. Coop­er, and it’s not fair on ei­ther of them.”

“But it’s not fair on you to have to do that.”

“No,” he said, “but that’s a dif­fer­ent sort of not fair. That’s just like an earth­quake or a rain­storm. It might not be fair, but no one’s to blame. But if I just leave my moth­er with an old la­dy who isn’t very well her­self, then that’s a dif­fer­ent kind of not fair. That would be wrong. I’ve just got to go home. But prob­ably it’s go­ing to be dif­fi­cult to go back as we were. Prob­ably the se­cret’s out now. I don’t sup­pose Mrs. Coop­er will have been able to look af­ter her, not if my moth­er’s in one of those times when she gets fright­ened of things. So she’s prob­ably had to get help, and when I go back, I’ll be made to go in­to some kind of in­sti­tu­tion.”

“No! Like an or­phan­age?”

“I think that’s what they do. I just don’t know. I’ll hate it.”

“You could es­cape with the knife, Will! You could come to my world!”

“I still be­long there, where I can be with her. When I’m grown up I’ll be able to look af­ter her prop­er­ly, in my own house. No one can in­ter­fere then.”

“D’you think you’ll get mar­ried?”

He was qui­et for a long time. She knew he was think­ing, though.

“I can’t see that far ahead,” he said. “It would have to be some­one who un­der­stands about… I don’t think there’s any’ one like that in my world. Would you get mar­ried?”

“Me too,” she said. “Not to any­one in my world, I shouldn’t think.”

They walked on stea­di­ly, wan­der­ing to­ward the hori­zon. They had all the time in the world: all the time the world had.

Af­ter a while Lyra said, “You will keep the knife, won’t you? So you could vis­it my world?”

“Of course. I cer­tain­ly wouldn’t give it to any­one else, ev­er.”

“Don’t look… she said, not al­ter­ing her pace. “There they are again. On the left.”

“They are fol­low­ing us,” said Will, de­light­ed.

“Shh!”

“I thought they would. Okay, we’ll just pre­tend now, we’ll just wan­der along as if we’re look­ing for them, and we’ll look in all sorts of stupid places.”

It be­came a game. They found a pond and searched among the reeds and in the mud, say­ing loud­ly that the dae­mons were bound to be shaped like frogs or wa­ter bee­tles or slugs; they peeled off the bark of a long­fall­en tree at the edge of a string­wood grove, pre­tend­ing to have seen the two dae­mons creep­ing un­der­neath it in the form of ear­wigs; Lyra made a great fuss of an ant she claimed to have trod­den on, sym­pa­thiz­ing with its bruis­es, say­ing its face was just like Pan’s, ask­ing in mock sor­row why it was re­fus­ing to speak to her.

But when she thought they were gen­uine­ly out of earshot, she said earnest­ly to Will, lean­ing close to speak qui­et­ly:

“We had to leave them, didn’t we? We didn’t have a choice re­al­ly?”

“Yes, we had to. It was worse for you than for me, but we didn’t have any choice at all. Be­cause you made a promise to Roger, and you had to keep it.”

“And you had to speak to your fa­ther again…”

“And we had to let them all out.”

“Yes, we did. I’m so glad we did. Pan will be glad one day, too, when I die. We won’t be split up. It was a good thing we did.”

As the sun rose high­er in the sky and the air be­came warmer, they be­gan to look for shade. To­ward noon they found them­selves on the slope ris­ing to­ward the sum­mit of a ridge, and when they’d reached it, Lyra flopped down on the grass and said, “Well! If we don’t find some­where shady soon…”

There was a val­ley lead­ing down on the oth­er side, and it was thick with bush­es, so they guessed there might be a stream as well. They tra­versed the slope of the ridge till it dipped in­to the head of the val­ley, and there, sure enough, among ferns and reeds, a spring bub­bled out of the rock.

They dipped their hot faces in the wa­ter and sw­al­lowed grate­ful­ly, and then they fol­lowed the stream down­ward, see­ing it gath­er in minia­ture whirlpools and pour over tiny ledges of stone, and all the time get fuller and wider.

“How does it do that?” Lyra mar­veled. “There’s no more wa­ter com­ing in­to it from any­where else, but there’s so much more of it here than up there.”

Will, watch­ing the shad­ows out of the cor­ner of his eye, saw them slip ahead, leap­ing over the ferns to dis­ap­pear in­to the bush­es far­ther down. He point­ed silent­ly.

“It just goes slow­er,” he said. “It doesn’t flow as fast as the spring comes out, so it gath­ers in these pools… They’ve gone in there,” he whis­pered, in­di­cat­ing a lit­tle group of trees at the foot of the slope.

They looked at each oth­er, a cu­ri­ous­ly for­mal and se­ri­ous look, be­fore set­ting off to fol­low the stream. The un­der­growth got thick­er as they went down the val­ley; the stream went in­to tun­nels of green and emerged in dap­pled clear­in­gs, on­ly to tum­ble over a lip of stone and bury it­self in the green again, and they had to fol­low it as much by hear­ing as by sight.

At the foot of the hill, it ran in­to the lit­tle wood of sil­ver­barked trees.

Fa­ther Gomez watched from the top of the ridge. It hadn’t been hard to fol­low them; de­spite Mary’s con­fi­dence in the open sa­van­na, there was plen­ty of con­ceal­ment in the grass and the oc­ca­sion­al thick­ets of string­wood and saplac­quer bush­es. The two young peo­ple had spent a lot of time ear­li­er look­ing all around as if they thought they were be­ing fol­lowed. He had had to keep some dis­tance away, but as the morn­ing passed, they be­came more and more ab­sorbed in each oth­er and paid less at­ten­tion to the land­scape.

The one thing he didn’t want to do was hurt the boy. He had a hor­ror of harm­ing an in­no­cent per­son. The on­ly way to make sure of his tar­get was to get close enough to see her clear­ly, which meant fol­low­ing them in­to the wood.

Qui­et­ly and cau­tious­ly he moved down the course of the stream. His dae­mon the green­backed bee­tle flew over­head, tast­ing the air; her eye­sight was less good than his, but her sense of smell was acute, and she caught the scent of the young peo­ple’s flesh very clear­ly. She would go a lit­tle ahead, perch on a stem of grass, and wait for him, then move on again; and as she caught the trail in the air that their bod­ies left be­hind, Fa­ther Gomez found him­self prais­ing God for his mis­sion, be­cause it was clear­er than ev­er that the boy and the girl were walk­ing in­to mor­tal sin.

He watched them go in among the trees. They hadn’t looked back once since com­ing over the top of the ridge, but he still kept low, mov­ing down the stream at a crouch, hold­ing the ri­fle in one hand, bal­anc­ing with the oth­er.

He was so close to suc­cess now that for the first time he found him­self spec­ulat­ing on what he would do af­ter­ward, and whether he would please the King­dom of Heav­en more by go­ing back to Gene­va or stay­ing to evan­ge­lize this world. The first thing to do here would be to con­vince the four­legged crea­tures, who seemed to have the ru­di­ments of rea­son, that their habit of rid­ing on wheels was abom­in­able and Sa­tan­ic, and con­trary to the will of God. Break them of that, and sal­va­tion would fol­low.

He reached the foot of the slope, where the trees be­gan, and laid the ri­fle down silent­ly.

He gazed in­to the sil­ver­green­gold shad­ows, and lis­tened, with both hands be­hind his ears to catch and fo­cus any qui­et voic­es through the in­sect chirp­ing and the trick­le of the stream. Yes: there they were. They’d stopped.

He bent to pick up the ri­fle…

And found him­self ut­ter­ing a hoarse and breath­less gasp, as some­thing clutched his dae­mon and pulled her away from him.

But there was noth­ing there! Where was she? The pain was atro­cious. He heard her cry­ing, and cast about wild­ly to left and right, look­ing for her.

“Keep still,” said a voice from the air, “and be qui­et. I have your dae­mon in my hand.”

“But, where are you? Who are you?”

“My name is Balthamos,” said the voice.

Will and Lyra fol­lowed the stream in­to the wood, walk­ing care­ful­ly, say­ing lit­tle, un­til they were in the very cen­ter.

There was a lit­tle clear­ing in the mid­dle of the grove, which was floored with soft grass and moss­cov­ered rocks. The branch­es laced across over­head, al­most shut­ting out the sky and let­ting through lit­tle mov­ing span­gles and se­quins of sun­light, so that ev­ery­thing was dap­pled with gold and sil­ver.

And it was qui­et. On­ly the trick­le of the stream, and the oc­ca­sion­al rus­tle of leaves high up in a lit­tle curl of breeze, broke the si­lence.

Will put down the pack­age of food; Lyra put down her lit­tle ruck­sack. There was no sign of the dae­mon shad­ows any­where. They were com­plete­ly alone.

They took off their shoes and socks and sat down on the mossy rocks at the edge of the stream, dip­ping their feet in the cold wa­ter and feel­ing the shock of it in­vig­orate their blood.

“I’m hun­gry,” Will said.

“Me too,” said Lyra, though she was al­so feel­ing more than that, some­thing sub­dued and press­ing and halfhap­py and half­painful, so that she wasn’t quite sure what it was.

They un­fold­ed the cloth and ate some bread and cheese. For some rea­son their hands were slow and clum­sy, and they hard­ly tast­ed the food, al­though the bread was floury and crisp from the hot bak­in­gstones, and the cheese was flaky and salty and very fresh.

Then Lyra took one of those lit­tle red fruits. With a fast­beat­ing heart, she turned to him and said, “Will…”

And she lift­ed the fruit gen­tly to his mouth.

She could see from his eyes that he knew at once what she meant, and that he was too joy­ful to speak. Her fin­gers were still at his lips, and he felt them trem­ble, and he put his own hand up to hold hers there, and then nei­ther of them could look; they were con­fused; they were brim­ming with hap­pi­ness.

Like two moths clum­si­ly bump­ing to­geth­er, with no more weight than that, their lips touched. Then be­fore they knew how it hap­pened, they were cling­ing to­geth­er, blind­ly press­ing their faces to­ward each oth­er.

“Like Mary said,” he whis­pered, “you know straight away when you like some­one, when you were asleep, on the moun­tain, be­fore she took you away, I told Pan…

“I heard,” she whis­pered, “I was awake and I want­ed to tell you the same and now I know what I must have felt all the time: I love you, Will, I love you…

The word love set his nerves ablaze. All his body thrilled with it, and he an­swered her in the same words, kiss­ing her hot face over and over again, drink­ing in with ado­ra­tion the scent of her body and her warm, hon­eyfra­grant hair and her sweet, moist mouth that tast­ed of the lit­tle red fruit.

Around them there was noth­ing but si­lence, as if all the world were hold­ing its breath.

Balthamos was ter­ri­fied.

He moved up the stream and away from the wood, hold­ing the scratch­ing, sting­ing, bit­ing in­sect dae­mon, and try­ing to con­ceal him­self as much as he could from the man who was stum­bling af­ter them.

He mustn’t let him catch up. He knew that Fa­ther Gomez would kill him in a mo­ment. An an­gel of his rank was no match for a man, even if that an­gel was strong and healthy, and Balthamos was nei­ther of those; be­sides which, he was crip­pled by grief over Baruch and shame at hav­ing de­sert­ed Will be­fore. He no longer even had the strength to fly.

“Stop, stop,” said Fa­ther Gomez. “Please keep still. I can’t see you, let’s talk, please, don’t hurt my dae­mon, I beg you…

In fact, the dae­mon was hurt­ing Balthamos. The an­gel could see the lit­tle green thing dim­ly through the backs of his clasped hands, and she was sink­ing her pow­er­ful jaws again and again in­to his palms. If he opened his hands just for a mo­ment, she would be gone. Balthamos kept them closed.

“This way,” he said, “fol­low me. Come away from the wood. I want to talk to you, and this is the wrong place.”

“But who are you? I can’t see you. Come clos­er, how can I tell what you are till I see you? Keep still, don’t move so quick­ly!”

But mov­ing quick­ly was the on­ly de­fense Balthamos had. Try­ing to ig­nore the sting­ing dae­mon, he picked his way up the lit­tle gul­ly where the stream ran, step­ping from rock to rock.

Then he made a mis­take: try­ing to look be­hind him, he slipped and put a foot in­to the wa­ter.

“Ah,” came a whis­per of sat­is­fac­tion as Fa­ther Gomez saw the splash.

Balthamos with­drew his foot at once and hur­ried on, but now a wet print ap­peared on the dry rocks each time he put his foot down. The priest saw it and leapt for­ward, and felt the brush of feath­ers on his hand.

He stopped in as­ton­ish­ment: the word an­gel re­ver­ber­at­ed in his mind. Balthamos seized the mo­ment to stum­ble for­ward again, and the priest felt him­self dragged af­ter him as an­oth­er bru­tal pang wrenched his heart.

Balthamos said over his shoul­der, “A lit­tle far­ther, just to the top of the ridge, and we shall talk, I promise.”

“Talk here! Stop where you are, and I swear I shan’t touch you!”

The an­gel didn’t re­ply: it was too hard to con­cen­trate. He had to split his at­ten­tion three ways: be­hind him to avoid the man, ahead to see where he was go­ing, and on the fu­ri­ous dae­mon tor­ment­ing his hands.

As for the priest, his mind was work­ing quick­ly. A tru­ly dan­ger­ous op­po­nent would have killed his dae­mon at once, and end­ed the mat­ter there and then; this an­tag­on­ist was afraid to strike.

With that in mind he let him­self stum­ble, and ut­tered lit­tle moans of pain, and plead­ed once or twice for the oth­er to stop, all the time watch­ing close­ly, mov­ing near­er, es­ti­mat­ing how big the oth­er was, how quick­ly he could move, which way he was look­ing.

“Please,” he said bro­ken­ly, “you don’t know how much this hurts, I can’t do you any harm, please can we stop and talk?”

He didn’t want to move out of sight of the wood. They were now at the point where the stream be­gan, and he could see the shape of Balthamos’s feet very light­ly press­ing the grass. The priest had watched ev­ery inch of the way, and he was sure now where the an­gel was stand­ing.

Balthamos turned around. The priest raised his eyes to the place where he thought the an­gel’s face would be, and saw him for the first time: just a shim­mer in the air, but there was no mis­tak­ing it.

The an­gel wasn’t quite close enough to reach in one move­ment, though, and in truth the pull on his dae­mon had been painful and weak­en­ing. Maybe he should take an­oth­er step or two…

“Sit down,” said Balthamos. “Sit down where you are. Not a step clos­er.”

“What do you want?” said Fa­ther Gomez, not mov­ing.

“What do I want? I want to kill you, but I haven’t got the strength.”

“But are you an an­gel?”

“What does it mat­ter?”

“You might have made a mis­take. We might be on the same side.”

“No, we’re not. I have been fol­low­ing you. I know whose side you’re on, no, no, don’t move. Stay there.”

“It’s not too late to re­pent. Even an­gels are al­lowed to do that. Let me hear your con­fes­sion.”

“Oh, Baruch, help me!” cried Balthamos in de­spair, turn­ing away.

And as he cried out, Fa­ther Gomez leapt for him. His shoul­der hit the an­gel’s, and knocked Balthamos off bal­an­ce; and in throw­ing out a hand to save him­self, the an­gel let go of the in­sect dae­mon. The bee­tle flew free at once, and Fa­ther Gomez felt a surge of re­lief and strength. In fact, it was that which killed him, to his great sur­prise. He hurled him­self so hard at the faint form of the an­gel, and he ex­pect­ed so much more re­sis­tance than he met, that he couldn’t keep his bal­an­ce. His foot slipped; his mo­men­tum car­ried him down to­ward the stream; and ; Balthamos, think­ing of what Baruch would have done, kicked aside the priest’s hand as he flung it out for sup­port.

Fa­ther Gomez fell hard. His head cracked against a stone, and he fell stunned with his face in the wa­ter. The cold shock woke him at once, but as he choked and fee­bly tried to rise, Balthamos, des­per­ate, ig­nored the dae­mon sting­ing his face and his eyes and his mouth, and used all the lit­tle weight he had to hold the man’s head down in the wa­ter, and he kept it there, and kept it there, and kept it there.

When the dae­mon sud­den­ly van­ished, Balthamos let go. The man was dead. As soon as he was sure, Balthamos hauled the body out of the stream and laid it care­ful­ly on the grass, fold­ing the priest’s hands over his breast and clos­ing his eyes.

Then Balthamos stood up, sick and weary and full of pain.

“Baruch,” he said, “oh, Baruch, my dear, I can do no more. Will and the girl are safe, and ev­ery­thing will be well, but this is the end for me, though tru­ly I died when you did, Baruch, my beloved.”

A mo­ment lat­er, he was gone.

In the bean field, drowsy in the late af­ter­noon heat, Mary heard Atal’s voice, and she couldn’t tell ex­cite­ment from alarm: had an­oth­er tree fall­en? Had the man with the ri­fle ap­peared?

Look! Look! Atal was say­ing, nudg­ing Mary’s pock­et with her trunk, so Mary took the spy­glass and did as her friend said, point­ing it up to the sky.

Tell me what it’s do­ing! said Atal. I can feel it is dif­fer­ent, but I can’t see.

The ter­ri­ble flood of Dust in the sky had stopped flow­ing. It wasn’t still, by any means; Mary scanned the whole sky with the am­ber lens, see­ing a cur­rent here, an ed­dy there, a vor­tex far­ther off; it was in per­pet­ual move­ment, but it wasn’t flow­ing away any­more. In fact, if any­thing, it was falling like snowflakes.

She thought of the wheel trees: the flow­ers that opened up­ward would be drink­ing in this gold­en rain. Mary could al­most feel them wel­com­ing it in their poor parched throats, which were so per­fect­ly shaped for it, and which had been starved for so long.

The young ones, said Atal.

Mary turned, spy­glass in hand, to see Will and Lyra re­turn­ing. They were some way off; they weren’t hur­ry­ing. They were hold­ing hands, talk­ing to­geth­er, heads close, obliv­ious to ev­ery­thing else; she could see that even from a dis­tance.

She near­ly put the spy­glass to her eye, but held back, and re­turned it to her pock­et. There was no need for the glass; she knew what she would see; they would seem to be made of liv­ing gold. They would seem the true im­age of what hu­man be­in­gs al­ways could be, once they had come in­to their in­her­itance.

The Dust pour­ing down from the stars had found a liv­ing home again, and these chil­dren­no­longer­chil­dren, sat­urat­ed with love, were the cause of it all.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-SIX - THE BROKEN ARROW


The two dae­mons moved through the silent vil­lage, in and out of the shad­ows, padding cat­formed across the moon­lit gath­er­in­gfloor, paus­ing out­side the open door of Mary’s house.

Cau­tious­ly they looked in­side and saw on­ly the sleep­ing wom­an; so they with­drew and moved through the moon­light again, to­ward the shel­ter tree.

Its long branch­es trailed their fra­grant corkscrew leaves al­most down to the ground. Very slow­ly, very care­ful not to rus­tle a leaf or snap a fall­en twig, the two shapes slipped in through the leaf cur­tain and saw what they were seek­ing: the boy and the girl, fast asleep in each oth­er’s arms.

They moved clos­er over the grass and touched the sleep­ers soft­ly with nose, paw, whiskers, bathing in the life­giv­ing warmth they gave off, but be­ing in­fi­nite­ly care­ful not to wake them.

As they checked their peo­ple (gen­tly clean­ing Will’s fastheal­ing wound, lift­ing the lock of hair off Lyra’s face), there was a soft sound be­hind them.

In­stant­ly, in to­tal si­lence, both dae­mons sprang around, be­com­ing wolves: mad light eyes, bare white teeth, men­ace in ev­ery line.

A wom­an stood there, out­lined by the moon. It was not Mary, and when she spoke, they heard her clear­ly, though her voice made no sound.

“Come with me,” she said.

Pan­ta­lai­mon’s dae­mon heart leapt with­in him, but he said noth­ing un­til he could greet her away from the sleep­ers un­der the tree.

“Ser­afi­na Pekkala!” he said joy­ful­ly. “Where have you been? Do you know what’s hap­pened?”

“Hush. Let’s fly to a place where we can talk,” she said, mind­ful of the sleep­ing vil­lagers.

Her branch of cloud­pine lay by the door of Mary’s house, and as she took it up, the two dae­mons changed in­to birds, a night­in­gale, an owl, and flew with her over the thatched roofs, over the grass­lands, over the ridge, and to­ward the near­est wheel tree grove, as huge as a cas­tle, its crown look­ing like curds of sil­ver in the moon­light.

There Ser­afi­na Pekkala set­tled on the high­est com­fort­able branch, among the open flow­ers drink­ing in the Dust, and the two birds perched near­by.

“You won’t be birds for long,” she said. “Very soon now your shapes will set­tle. Look around and take this sight in­to your mem­ory.”

“What will we be?” said Pan­ta­lai­mon.

“You’ll find out soon­er than you think. Lis­ten,” said Ser­afi­na Pekkala, “and I’ll tell you some witchlore that none but witch­es know. The rea­son I can do that is that you are here with me, and your hu­mans are down there, sleep­ing. Who are the on­ly peo­ple for whom that is pos­si­ble?”

“Witch­es,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon, “and shamans. So…”

“In leav­ing you both on the shores of the world of the dead, Lyra and Will did some­thing, with­out know­ing it, that witch­es have done since the first time there were witch­es. There’s a re­gion of our north land, a des­olate, abom­in­able place, where a great catas­tro­phe hap­pened in the child­hood of the world, and where noth­ing has lived since. No dae­mons can en­ter it. To be­come a witch, a girl must cross it alone and leave her dae­mon be­hind. You know the suf­fer­ing they must un­der­go.

But hav­ing done it, they find that their dae­mons were not sev­ered, as in Bolvan­gar; they are still one whole be­ing; but now they can roam free, and go to far places and see strange things and bring back knowl­edge.

“And you are not sev­ered, are you?”

“No,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon. “We are still one. But it was so painful, and we were so fright­ened…”

“Well,” said Ser­afi­na, “the two of them will not fly like witch­es, and they will not live as long as we do; but thanks to what they did, you and they are witch in all but that.”

The two dae­mons con­sid­ered the strangeness of this knowl­edge.

“Does that mean we shall be birds, like witch­es’ dae­mons?” said Pan­ta­lai­mon.

“Be pa­tient.”

“And how can Will be a witch? I thought all witch­es were fe­male.”

“Those two have changed many things. We are all learn­ing new ways, even witch­es. But one thing hasn’t changed: you must help your hu­mans, not hin­der them. You must help them and guide them and en­cour­age them to­ward wis­dom. That’s what dae­mons are for.”

They were silent. Ser­afi­na turned to the night­in­gale and said, “What is your name?”

“I have no name. I didn’t know I was born un­til I was torn away from his heart.”

“Then I shall name you Kir­ja­va.”

“Kir­ja­va,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon, try­ing the sound. “What does it mean?”

“Soon you will see what it means. But now,” Ser­afi­na went on, “you must lis­ten care­ful­ly, be­cause I’m go­ing to tell you what you should do.”

“No,” said Kir­ja­va force­ful­ly.

Ser­afi­na said gen­tly, “I can hear from your tone that you know what I’m go­ing to say.”

“We don’t want to hear it!” said Pan­ta­lai­mon.

“It’s too soon,” said the night­in­gale. “It’s much too soon.”

Ser­afi­na was silent, be­cause she agreed with them, and she felt sor­row­ful. She was the wis­est one there, and she had to guide them to what was right; but she let their ag­ita­tion sub­side be­fore she went on.

“Where did you go, in your wan­der­in­gs?” she said.

“Through many worlds,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon. “Ev­ery­where we found a win­dow, we went through. There are more win­dows than we thought.”

“And you saw…

“Yes,” said Kir­ja­va, “we looked close­ly, and we saw what was hap­pen­ing.”

“We saw many oth­er things. We met an an­gel,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon quick­ly. “And we saw the world where the lit­tle peo­ple come from, the Gal­livespi­ans. There are big peo­ple there, too, who try and kill them.”

They told the witch more of what they’d seen, and they were try­ing to dis­tract her, and she knew it; but she let them talk, be­cause of the love each one had for the oth­er’s voice.

But even­tu­al­ly they ran out of things to tell her, and they fell silent. The on­ly sound was the gen­tle, end­less whis­per of the leaves, un­til Ser­afi­na Pekkala said:

“You have been keep­ing away from Will and Lyra to pun­ish them. I know why you’re do­ing that; my Kaisa did just the same af­ter I came through the des­olate bar­rens. But he came to me even­tu­al­ly, be­cause we loved each oth­er still. And they will need you soon to help them do what has to be done next. Be­cause you have to tell them what you know.”

Pan­ta­lai­mon cried aloud, a pure, cold owl cry, a sound nev­er heard in that world be­fore. In nests and bur­rows for a long way around, and wher­ev­er any small night crea­ture was hunt­ing or graz­ing or scav­eng­ing, a new and un­for­get­ta­ble fear came in­to be­ing.

Ser­afi­na watched from close by, and felt noth­ing but com­pas­sion un­til she looked at Will’s dae­mon, Kir­ja­va the night­in­gale. She re­mem­bered talk­ing to the witch Ru­ta Ska­di, who had asked, af­ter see­ing Will on­ly once, if Ser­afi­na had looked in­to his eyes; and Ser­afi­na had replied that she had not dared to. This lit­tle brown bird was ra­di­at­ing an im­pla­ca­ble fe­roc­ity as pal­pa­ble as heat, and Ser­afi­na was afraid of it.

Fi­nal­ly Pan­ta­lai­mon’s wild scream­ing died away, and Kir­ja­va said:

“And we have to tell them.”

“Yes, you do,” said the witch gen­tly.

Grad­ual­ly the fe­roc­ity left the gaze of the lit­tle brown bird, and Ser­afi­na could look at her again. She saw a des­olate sad­ness in its place.

“There is a ship com­ing,” Ser­afi­na said. “I left it to fly here and find you. I came with the gyp­tians, all the way from our world. They will be here in an­oth­er day or so.”

The two birds sat close, and in a mo­ment they had changed their forms, be­com­ing two doves.

Ser­afi­na went on: “This may be the last time you fly. I can see a lit­tle ahead; I can see that you will both be able to climb this high as long as there are trees this size; but I think you will not be birds when your forms set­tle. Take in all that you can, and re­mem­ber it well. I know that you and Lyra and Will are go­ing to think hard and painful­ly, and I know you will make the best choice. But it is yours to make, and no one else’s.”

They didn’t speak. She took her branch of cloud­pine and lift­ed away from the tow­er­ing tree­tops, cir­cling high above, feel­ing on her skin the cool­ness of the breeze and the tin­gle of the starlight and the benev­olent sift­ing of that Dust she had nev­er seen.

She flew down to the vil­lage once more and went silent­ly in­to the wom­an’s house. She knew noth­ing about Mary ex­cept that she came from the same world as Will, and that her part in the events was cru­cial. Whether she was fierce or friend­ly, Ser­afi­na had no way of telling; but she had to wake Mary up with­out startling her, and there was a spell for that.

She sat on the floor at the wom­an’s head and watched through half­closed eyes, breath­ing in and out in time with her. Present­ly her halfvi­sion be­gan to show her the pale forms that Mary was see­ing in her dreams, and she ad­just­ed her mind to res­onate with them, as if she were tun­ing a string. Then with a fur­ther ef­fort Ser­afi­na her­self stepped in among them. Once she was there, she could speak to Mary, and she did so with the in­stant easy af­fec­tion that we some­times feel for peo­ple we meet in dreams.

A mo­ment lat­er they were talk­ing to­geth­er in a mur­mured rush of which Mary lat­er re­mem­bered noth­ing, and walk­ing through a sil­ly land­scape of reed beds and elec­tri­cal trans­form­ers. It was time for Ser­afi­na to take charge.

“In a few mo­ments,” she said, “you’ll wake up. Don’t be alarmed. You’ll find me be­side you. I’m wak­ing you like this so you’ll know it’s quite safe and there’s noth­ing to hurt you. And then we can talk prop­er­ly.”

She with­drew, tak­ing the dream­Ma­ry with her, un­til she found her­self in the house again, cross­legged on the earth­en floor, with Mary’s eyes glit­ter­ing as they looked at her.

“You must be the witch,” Mary whis­pered.

“I am. My name is Ser­afi­na Pekkala. What are you called?”

“Mary Mal­one. I’ve nev­er been wo­ken so qui­et­ly. Am I awake?”

“Yes. We must talk to­geth­er, and dream talk is hard to con­trol, and hard­er to re­mem­ber. It’s bet­ter to talk awake. Do you pre­fer to stay in­side, or will you walk with me in the moon­light?”

“I’ll come,” said Mary, sit­ting up and stretch­ing. “Where are the oth­ers?”

“Asleep un­der the tree.”

They moved out of the house and past the tree with its cur­tain of all­con­ceal­ing leaves, and walked down to the riv­er.

Mary watched Ser­afi­na Pekkala with a mix­ture of wari­ness and ad­mi­ra­tion: she had nev­er seen a hu­man form so slen­der and grace­ful. She seemed younger than Mary her­self, though Lyra had said she was hun­dreds of years old; the on­ly hint of age came in her ex­pres­sion, which was full of a com­pli­cat­ed sad­ness.

They sat on the bank over the sil­verblack wa­ter, and Ser­afi­na told her that she had spo­ken to the chil­dren’s dae­mons.

“They went look­ing for them to­day,” Mary said, “but some­thing else hap­pened. Will’s nev­er seen his dae­mon. He didn’t know for cer­tain that he had one.”

“Well, he has. And so have you.”

Mary stared at her.

“If you could see him,” Ser­afi­na went on, “you would see a black bird with red legs and a bright yel­low beak, slight­ly curved. A bird of the moun­tains.”

“An Alpine chough… How can you see him?”

“With my eyes half­closed, I can see him. If we had time, I could teach you to see him, too, and to see the dae­mons of oth­ers in your world. It’s strange for us to think you can’t see them.”

Then she told Mary what she had said to the dae­mons, and what it meant.

“And the dae­mons will have to tell them?” Mary said.

“I thought of wak­ing them to tell them my­self. I thought of telling you and let­ting you have the re­spon­si­bil­ity. But I saw their dae­mons, and I knew that would be best.”

“They’re in love.”

“I know.”

“They’ve on­ly just dis­cov­ered it…”

Mary tried to take in all the im­pli­ca­tions of what Ser­afi­na had told her, but it was too hard.

Af­ter a minute or so Mary said, “Can you see Dust?”

“No, I’ve nev­er seen it, and un­til the wars be­gan, we had nev­er heard of it.”

Mary took the spy­glass from her pock­et and hand­ed it to the witch. Ser­afi­na put it to her eye and gasped.

“That is Dust… It’s beau­ti­ful!”

“Turn to look back at the shel­ter tree.”

Ser­afi­na did and ex­claimed again. “They did this?” she said.

“Some­thing hap­pened to­day, or yes­ter­day if it’s af­ter mid­night,” Mary said, try­ing to find the words to ex­plain, and re­mem­ber­ing her vi­sion of the Dust flow as a great riv­er like the Mis­sis­sip­pi. “Some­thing tiny but cru­cial… If you want­ed to di­vert a mighty riv­er in­to a dif­fer­ent course, and all you had was a sin­gle peb­ble, you could do it, as long as you put the peb­ble in the right place to send the first trick­le of wa­ter that way in­stead of this. Some­thing like that hap­pened yes­ter­day. I don’t know what it was. They saw each oth­er dif­fer­ent­ly, or some­thing… Un­til then, they hadn’t felt like that, but sud­den­ly they did. And then the Dust was at­tract­ed to them, very pow­er­ful­ly, and it stopped flow­ing the oth­er way.”

“So that was how it was to hap­pen!” said Ser­afi­na, mar­vel­ing. “And now it’s safe, or it will be when the an­gels fill the great chasm in the un­der­world.”

She told Mary about the abyss, and about how she her­self had found out.

“I was fly­ing high,” she ex­plained, “look­ing for a land­fall, and I met an an­gel: a fe­male an­gel. She was very strange; she was old and young to­geth­er,” she went on, for­get­ting that that was how she her­self ap­peared to Mary. “Her name was Xapha­nia. She told me many things… She said that all the his­to­ry of hu­man life has been a strug­gle be­tween wis­dom and stu­pid­ity. She and the rebel an­gels, the fol­low­ers of wis­dom, have al­ways tried to open minds; the Au­thor­ity and his church­es have al­ways tried to keep them closed. She gave me many ex­am­ples from my world.”

“I can think of many from mine.”

“And for most of that time, wis­dom has had to work in se­cret, whis­per­ing her words, mov­ing like a spy through the hum­ble places of the world while the courts and palaces are oc­cu­pied by her en­emies.”

“Yes,” said Mary, “I rec­og­nize that, too.”

“And the strug­gle isn’t over now, though the forces of the King­dom have met a set­back. They’ll re­group un­der a new com­man­der and come back strong­ly, and we must be ready to re­sist.”

“But what hap­pened to Lord As­riel?” said Mary.

“He fought the Re­gent of Heav­en, the an­gel Meta­tron, and he wres­tled him down in­to the abyss. Meta­tron is gone for­ev­er. So is Lord As­riel.”

Mary caught her breath. “And Mrs. Coul­ter?” she said.

As an an­swer the witch took an ar­row from her quiver. She took her time se­lect­ing it: the best, the straight­est, the most per­fect­ly bal­an­ced.

And she broke it in two.

“Once in my world,” she said, “I saw that wom­an tor­tur­ing a witch, and I swore to my­self that I would send that ar­row in­to her throat. Now I shall nev­er do that. She sac­ri­ficed her­self with Lord As­riel to fight the an­gel and make the world safe for Lyra. They could not have done it alone, but to­geth­er they did it.”

Mary, dis­tressed, said, “How can we tell Lyra?”

“Wait un­til she asks,” said Ser­afi­na. “And she might not. In any case, she has her sym­bol read­er; that will tell her any­thing she wants to know.”

They sat in si­lence for a while, com­pan­ion­ably, as the stars slow­ly wheeled in the sky.

“Can you see ahead and guess what they’ll choose to do?” said Mary.

“No, but if Lyra re­turns to her own world, then I will be her sis­ter as long as she lives. What will you do?”

“Mary be­gan, and found she hadn’t con­sid­ered that for a mo­ment. “I sup­pose I be­long in my own world. Though I’ll be sor­ry to leave this one; I’ve been very hap­py here. The hap­pi­est I’ve ev­er been in my life, I think.”

“Well, if you do re­turn home, you shall have a sis­ter in an­oth­er world,” said Ser­afi­na, “and so shall I. We shall see each oth­er again in a day or so, when the ship ar­rives, and we’ll talk more on the voy­age home; and then we’ll part for­ev­er. Em­brace me now, sis­ter.”

Mary did so, and Ser­afi­na Pekkala flew away on her cloud­pine branch over the reeds, over the marsh­es, over the mud­flats and the beach, and over the sea, un­til Mary could see her no more.

At about the same time, one of the large blue lizards came across the body of Fa­ther Gomez. Will and Lyra had re­turned to the vil­lage that af­ter­noon by a dif­fer­ent route and hadn’t seen it; the priest lay undis­turbed where Balthamos had laid him. The lizards were scav­en­gers, but they were mild and harm­less crea­tures, and by an an­cient un­der­stand­ing with the mule­fa, they were en­ti­tled to take any crea­ture left dead af­ter dark.

The lizard dragged the priest’s body back to her nest, and her chil­dren feast­ed very well. As for the ri­fle, it lay in the grass where Fa­ther Gomez had laid it down, qui­et­ly turn­ing to rust.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-SEVEN - THE DUNES


Next day Will and Lyra went out by them­selves again, speak­ing lit­tle, ea­ger to be alone with each oth­er. They looked dazed, as if some hap­py ac­ci­dent had robbed them of their wits; they moved slow­ly; their eyes were not fo­cused on what they looked at.

They spent all day on the wide hills, and in the heat of the af­ter­noon, they vis­it­ed their goldand­sil­ver grove. They talked, they bathed, they ate, they kissed, they lay in a trance of hap­pi­ness mur­mur­ing words whose sound was as con­fused as their sense, and they felt they were melt­ing with love.

In the evening they shared the meal with Mary and Atal, say­ing lit­tle, and be­cause the air was hot they thought they’d walk down to the sea, where there might be a cool breeze. They wan­dered along the riv­er un­til they came to the wide beach, bright un­der the moon, where the low tide was turn­ing.

They lay down in the soft sand at the foot of the dunes, and then they heard the first bird call­ing.

They both turned their heads at once, be­cause it was a bird that sound­ed like no crea­ture that be­longed to the world they were in. From some­where above in the dark came a del­icate trilling song, and then an­oth­er an­swered it from a dif­fer­ent di­rec­tion. De­light­ed, Will and Lyra jumped up and tried to see the singers, but all they could make out was a pair of dark skim­ming shapes that flew low and then dart­ed up again, all the time singing and singing in rich, liq­uid bell tones an end­less­ly var­ied song.

And then, with a flut­ter of wings that threw up a lit­tle foun­tain of sand in front of him, the first bird land­ed a few yards away.

Lyra said, “Pan… ?”

He was formed like a dove, but his col­or was dark and hard to tell in the moon­light; at any rate, he showed up clear­ly on the white sand. The oth­er bird still cir­cled over­head, still singing, and then she flew down to join him: an­oth­er dove, but pearl white, and with a crest of dark red feath­ers.

And Will knew what it was to see his dae­mon. As she flew down to the sand, he felt his heart tight­en and re­lease in a way he nev­er for­got. Six­ty years and more would go by, and as an old man he would still feel some sen­sa­tions as bright and fresh as ev­er: Lyra’s fin­gers putting the fruit be­tween his lips un­der the goldand­sil­ver trees; her warm mouth press­ing against his; his dae­mon be­ing torn from his un­sus­pect­ing breast as they en­tered the world of the dead; and the sweet right­ful­ness of her com­ing back to him at the edge of the moon­lit dunes.

Lyra made to move to­ward them, but Pan­ta­lai­mon spoke.

“Lyra,” he said, “Ser­afi­na Pekkala came to us last night. She told us all kinds of things. She’s gone back to guide the gyp­tians here. Farder Coram’s com­ing, and Lord Faa, and they’ll be here…

“Pan,” she said, dis­tressed, “oh, Pan, you’re not hap­py, what is it? What is it?”

Then he changed, and flowed over the sand to her as a snowwhite er­mine. The oth­er dae­mon changed, too, Will felt it hap­pen, like a lit­tle grip at his heart, and be­came a cat.

Be­fore she moved to him, she spoke. She said, “The witch gave me a name. I had no need of one be­fore. She called me Kir­ja­va. But lis­ten, lis­ten to us now…”

“Yes, you must lis­ten,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon. “This is hard to ex­plain.”

Be­tween them, the dae­mons man­aged to tell them ev­ery­thing Ser­afi­na had told them, be­gin­ning with the rev­ela­tion about the chil­dren’s own na­tures: about how, with­out in­tend­ing it, they had be­come like witch­es in their pow­er to sep­arate and yet still be one be­ing.

“But that’s not all,” Kir­ja­va said.

And Pan­ta­lai­mon said, “Oh, Lyra, for­give us, but we have to tell you what we found out…”

Lyra was be­wil­dered. When had Pan ev­er need­ed for­giv­ing? She looked at Will, and saw his puz­zle­ment as clear as her own.

“Tell us,” he said. “Don’t be afraid.”

“It’s about Dust,” said the cat dae­mon, and Will mar­veled to hear part of his own na­ture telling him some­thing he didn’t know. “It was all flow­ing away, all the Dust there was, down in­to the abyss that you saw. Some­thing’s stopped it flow­ing down there, but…

“Will, it was that gold­en light!” Lyra said. “The light that all flowed in­to the abyss and van­ished… And that was Dust? Was it re­al­ly?”

“Yes. But there’s more leak­ing out all the time,” Pan­ta­lai­mon went on. “And it mustn’t. It mustn’t all leak away. It’s got to stay in the world and not van­ish, be­cause oth­er­wise ev­ery­thing good will fade away and die.”

“But where’s the rest leav­ing from?” said Lyra.

Both dae­mons looked at Will, and at the knife.

“Ev­ery time we made an open­ing,” said Kir­ja­va, and again Will felt that lit­tle thrill: She’s me, and I’m her, “ev­ery time any­one made an open­ing be­tween the worlds, us or the old Guild men, any­one, the knife cut in­to the emp­ti­ness out­side. The same emp­ti­ness there is down in the abyss. We nev­er knew. No one knew, be­cause the edge was too fine to see. But it was quite big enough for Dust to leak out of. If they closed it up again at once, there wasn’t time for much to leak out, but there were thou­sands that they nev­er closed up. So all this time, Dust has been leak­ing out of the worlds and in­to noth­ing­ness.”

The un­der­stand­ing was be­gin­ning to dawn on Will and Lyra. They fought it, they pushed it away, but it was just like the gray light that seeps in­to the sky and ex­tin­guish­es the stars: it crept past ev­ery bar­ri­er they could put up and un­der ev­ery blind and around the edges of ev­ery cur­tain they could draw against it.

“Ev­ery open­ing,” Lyra said in a whis­per.

“Ev­ery sin­gle one, they must all be closed?” said Will.

“Ev­ery sin­gle one,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon, whis­per­ing like Lyra.

“Oh, no,” said Lyra. “No, it can’t be true …

“And so we must leave our world to stay in Lyra’s,” said Kir­ja­va, “or Pan and Lyra must leave theirs and come to stay in ours. There’s no oth­er choice.”

Then the full bleak day­light struck in.

And Lyra cried aloud. Pan­ta­lai­mon’s owl cry the night be­fore had fright­ened ev­ery small crea­ture that heard it, but it was noth­ing to the pas­sion­ate wail that Lyra ut­tered now. The dae­mons were shocked, and Will, see­ing their re­ac­tion, un­der­stood why: they didn’t know the rest of the truth; they didn’t know what Will and Lyra them­selves had learned.

Lyra was shak­ing with anger and grief, strid­ing up and down with clenched fists and turn­ing her tearstream­ing face this way and that as if look­ing for an an­swer. Will jumped up and seized her shoul­ders, and felt her tense and trem­bling.

“Lis­ten,” he said, “Lyra, lis­ten: what did my fa­ther say?”

“Oh,” she cried, toss­ing her head this way and that, “he said, you know what he said, you were there, Will, you lis­tened, too!”

He thought she would die of her grief there and then. She flung her­self in­to his arms and sobbed, cling­ing pas­sion­ate­ly to his shoul­ders, press­ing her nails in­to his hack and her face in­to his neck, and all he could hear was, “No, no, no…”

“Lis­ten,” he said again, “Lyra, let’s try and re­mem­ber it ex­act­ly. There might be a way through. There might be a loop­hole.”

He dis­en­gaged her arms gen­tly and made her sit down. At once Pan­ta­lai­mon, fright­ened, flowed up on­to her lap, and the cat dae­mon ten­ta­tive­ly came close to Will. They hadn’t touched yet, but now he put out a hand to her, and she moved her cat face against his fin­gers and then stepped del­icate­ly on­to his lap.

“He said… Lyra be­gan, gulp­ing, “he said that peo­ple could spend a lit­tle time in oth­er worlds with­out be­ing af­fect­ed. They could. And we have, haven’t we? Apart from what we had to do to go in­to the world of the dead, we’re still healthy, aren’t we?”

“They can spend a lit­tle time, but not a long time,” Will said. “My fa­ther had been away from his world, my world, for ten years. And he was near­ly dy­ing when I found him. Ten years, that’s all.”

“But what about Lord Bo­re­al? Sir Charles? He was healthy enough, wasn’t he?”

“Yes, but re­mem­ber, he could go back to his own world when­ev­er he liked and get healthy again. That’s where you saw him first, af­ter all, in your world. He must have found some se­cret win­dow that no one else knew about.”

“Well, we could do that!”

“We could, ex­cept that…”

“All the win­dows must be closed,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon. “All of them.”

“But how do you know?” de­mand­ed Lyra.

“An an­gel told us,” said Kir­ja­va. “We met an an­gel. She told us all about that, and oth­er things as well. It’s true, Lyra.”

“She?” said Lyra pas­sion­ate­ly, sus­pi­cious.

“It was a fe­male an­gel,” said Kir­ja­va.

“I’ve nev­er heard of one of them. Maybe she was ly­ing.”

Will was think­ing through an­oth­er pos­si­bil­ity. “Sup­pose they closed all the oth­er win­dows,” he said, “and we just made one when we need­ed to, and went through as quick­ly as we could and closed it up im­me­di­ate­ly, that would be safe, sure­ly? If we didn’t leave much time for Dust to go out?”

“Yes!”

“We’d make it where no one could ev­er find it,” he went on, “and on­ly us two would know…

“Oh, it would work! I’m sure it would!” she said.

“And we could go from one to the oth­er, and stay healthy…

But the dae­mons were dis­tressed, and Kir­ja­va was mur­mur­ing, “No, no.”

And Pan­ta­lai­mon said, “The Specters… She told us about the Specters, too.”

“The Specters?” said Will. “We saw them dur­ing the bat­tle, for the first time. What about them?”

“Well, we found out where they come from,” said Kir­ja­va. “And this is the worst thing: they’re like the chil­dren of the abyss. Ev­ery time we open a win­dow with the knife, it makes a Specter. It’s like a lit­tle bit of the abyss that floats out and en­ters the world. That’s why the Cit­tagazze world was so full of them, be­cause of all the win­dows they left open there.”

“And they grow by feed­ing on Dust,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon. “And on dae­mons. Be­cause Dust and dae­mons are sort of sim­ilar; grownup dae­mons any­way. And the Specters get big­ger and stronger as they do…”

Will felt a dull hor­ror at his heart, and Kir­ja­va pressed her­self against his breast, feel­ing it, too, and try­ing to com­fort him.

“So ev­ery time I’ve used the knife,” he said, “ev­ery sin­gle time, I’ve made an­oth­er Specter come to life?”

He re­mem­bered Iorek Byr­ni­son, in the cave where he’d forged the knife again, say­ing, “What you don’t know is what the knife does on its own. Your in­ten­tions may be good. The knife has in­ten­tions, too.”

Lyra’s eyes were watch­ing him, wide with an­guish.

“Oh, we can’t, Will!” she said. “We can’t do that to peo­ple, not let oth­er Specters out, not now we’ve seen what they do!”

“All right,” he said, get­ting to his feet, hold­ing his dae­mon close to his breast. “Then we’ll have to, one of us will have to, I’ll come to your world and…”

She knew what he was go­ing to say, and she saw him hold­ing the beau­ti­ful, healthy dae­mon he hadn’t even be­gun to know; and she thought of his moth­er, and she knew that he was think­ing of her, too. To aban­don her and live with Lyra, even for the few years they’d have to­geth­er, could he do that? He might be liv­ing with Lyra, but she knew he wouldn’t be able to live with him­self.

“No,” she cried, jump­ing up be­side him, and Kir­ja­va joined Pan­ta­lai­mon on the sand as boy and girl clung to­geth­er des­per­ate­ly. “I’ll do it, Will! We’ll come to your world and live there! It doesn’t mat­ter if we get ill, me and Pan, we’re strong, I bet we last a good long time, and there are prob­ably good doc­tors in your world, Dr. Mal­one would know! Oh, let’s do that!”

He was shak­ing his head, and she saw the bril­liance of tears on his cheeks.

“D’you think I could bear that, Lyra?” he said. “D’you think I could live hap­pi­ly watch­ing you get sick and ill and fade away and then die, while I was get­ting stronger and more grownup day by day? Ten years… That’s noth­ing. It’d pass in a flash. We’d be in our twen­ties. It’s not that far ahead. Think of that, Lyra, you and me grown up, just prepar­ing to do all the things we want to do, and then… it all comes to an end. Do you think I could bear to live on af­ter you died? Oh, Lyra, I’d fol­low you down to the world of the dead with­out think­ing twice about it, just like you fol­lowed Roger; and that would be two lives gone for noth­ing, my life wast­ed like yours. No, we should spend our whole life­times to­geth­er, good, long, busy lives, and if we can’t spend them to­geth­er, we… we’ll have to spend them apart.”

Bit­ing her lip, she watched him as he walked up and down in his dis­tract­ed an­guish.

He stopped and turned, and went on: “D’you re­mem­ber an­oth­er thing he said, my fa­ther? He said we have to build the Re­pub­lic of Heav­en where we are. He said that for us there isn’t any else­where. That’s what he meant, I can see now. Oh, it’s too bit­ter. I thought he just meant Lord As­riel and his new world, but he meant us, he meant you and me. We have to live in our own worlds…”

“I’m go­ing to ask the alethiome­ter,” Lyra said. “That’ll know! I don’t know why I didn’t think of it be­fore.”

She sat down, wip­ing her cheeks with the palm of one hand and reach­ing for the ruck­sack with the oth­er. She car­ried it ev­ery­where; when Will thought of her in lat­er years, it was of­ten with that lit­tle bag over her shoul­der. She tucked the hair be­hind her ears in the swift move­ment he loved and took out the black vel­vet bun­dle.

“Can you see?” he said, for al­though the moon was bright, the sym­bols around the face were very small.

“I know where they all are,” she said, “I got it off by heart. Hush now… “

She crossed her legs, pulling the skirt over them to make a lap. Will lay on one el­bow and watched. The bright moon­light, re­flect­ed off the white sand, lit up her face with a ra­di­an­ce that seemed to draw out some oth­er ra­di­an­ce from in­side her; her eyes glit­tered, and her ex­pres­sion was so se­ri­ous and ab­sorbed that Will could have fall­en in love with her again if love didn’t al­ready pos­sess ev­ery fiber of his be­ing.

Lyra took a deep breath and be­gan to turn the wheels. But af­ter on­ly a few mo­ments, she stopped and turned the in­stru­ment around.

“Wrong place,” she said briefly, and tried again.

Will, watch­ing, saw her beloved face clear­ly. And be­cause he knew it so well, and he’d stud­ied her ex­pres­sion in hap­pi­ness and de­spair and hope and sor­row, he could tell that some­thing was wrong; for there was no sign of the clear con­cen­tra­tion she used to sink in­to so quick­ly. In­stead, an un­hap­py be­wil­der­ment spread grad­ual­ly over her: she bit her low­er lip, she blinked more and more, and her eyes moved slow­ly from sym­bol to sym­bol, al­most at ran­dom, in­stead of dart­ing swift­ly and cer­tain­ly.

“I don’t know,” she said, shak­ing her head, “I don’t know what’s hap­pen­ing… I know it so well, but I can’t seem to see what it means…”

She took a deep, shud­der­ing breath and turned the in­stru­ment around. It looked strange and awk­ward in her hands. Pan­ta­lai­mon, mouse­formed, crept in­to her lap and rest­ed his black paws on the crys­tal, peer­ing at one sym­bol af­ter an­oth­er. Lyra turned one wheel, turned an­oth­er, turned the whole thing around, and then looked up at Will, strick­en.

“Oh, Will,” she cried, “I can’t do it! It’s left me!”

“Hush,” he said, “don’t fret. It’s still there in­side you, all that knowl­edge. Just be calm and let your­self find it. Don’t force it. Just sort of float down to touch it…”

She gulped and nod­ded and an­gri­ly brushed her wrist across her eyes, and took sev­er­al deep breaths; but he could see she was too tense, and he put his hands on her shoul­ders and then felt her trem­bling and hugged her tight. She pulled back and tried again. Once more she gazed at the sym­bols, once more she turned the wheels, but those in­vis­ible lad­ders of mean­ing down which she’d stepped with such ease and con­fi­dence weren’t there. She just didn’t know what any of the sym­bols meant.

She turned away and clung to Will and said des­per­ate­ly:

“It’s no good, I can tell, it’s gone for­ev­er, it just came when I need­ed it, for all the things I had to do, for res­cu­ing Roger, and then for us two, and now that it’s over, now that ev­ery­thing’s fin­ished, it’s just left me… It’s gone, Will! I’ve lost it! It’ll nev­er come back!”

She sobbed with des­per­ate aban­don. All he could do was hold her. He didn’t know how to com­fort her, be­cause it was plain that she was right.

Then both the dae­mons bris­tled and looked up. Will and Lyra sensed it, too, and fol­lowed their eyes to the sky. A light was mov­ing to­ward them: a light with wings.

“It’s the an­gel we saw,” said Pan­ta­lai­mon, guess­ing.

He guessed cor­rect­ly. As the boy and the girl and the two dae­mons watched her ap­proach, Xapha­nia spread her wings wider and glid­ed down to the sand. Will, for all the time he’d spent in the com­pa­ny of Balthamos, wasn’t pre­pared for the strangeness of this en­counter. He and Lyra held each oth­er’s hands tight­ly as the an­gel came to­ward them, with the light of an­oth­er world shin­ing on her. She was un­clothed, but that meant noth­ing. What clothes could an an­gel wear any­way? Lyra thought. It was im­pos­si­ble to tell if she was old or young, but her ex­pres­sion was aus­tere and com­pas­sion­ate, and both Will and Lyra felt as if she knew them to their hearts.

“Will,” she said, “I have come to ask your help.”

“My help? How can I help you?”

“I want you to show me how to close the open­in­gs that the knife makes.”

Will sw­al­lowed. “I’ll show you,” he said, “and in re­turn, can you help us?”

“Not in the way you want. I can see what you’ve been talk­ing about. Your sor­row has left traces in the air. This is no com­fort, but be­lieve me, ev­ery sin­gle be­ing who knows of your dilem­ma wish­es things could be oth­er­wise; but there are fates that even the most pow­er­ful have to sub­mit to. There is noth­ing I can do to help you change the way things are.”

“Why… Lyra be­gan, and found her voice weak and trem­bling, “why can’t I read the alethiome­ter any­more? Why can’t I even do that? That was the one thing I could do re­al­ly well, and it’s just not there any­more, it just van­ished as if it had nev­er come…”

“You read it by grace,” said Xapha­nia, look­ing at her, “and you can re­gain it by work.”

“How long will that take?”

“A life­time.”

“That long…”

“But your read­ing will be even bet­ter then, af­ter a life­time of thought and ef­fort, be­cause it will come from con­scious un­der­stand­ing. Grace at­tained like that is deep­er and fuller than grace that comes freely, and fur­ther­more, once you’ve gained it, it will nev­er leave you.”

“You mean a full life­time, don’t you?” Lyra whis­pered. “A whole long life? Not… not just… a few years…”

“Yes, I do,” said the an­gel.

“And must all the win­dows be closed?” said Will. “Ev­ery sin­gle one ?”

“Un­der­stand this,” said Xapha­nia: “Dust is not a con­stant. There’s not a fixed quan­ti­ty that has al­ways been the same. Con­scious be­in­gs make Dust, they re­new it all the time, by think­ing and feel­ing and re­flect­ing, by gain­ing wis­dom and pass­ing it on.

“And if you help ev­ery­one else in your worlds to do that, by help­ing them to learn and un­der­stand about them­selves and each oth­er and the way ev­ery­thing works, and by show­ing them how to be kind in­stead of cru­el, and pa­tient in­stead of hasty, and cheer­ful in­stead of surly, and above all how to keep their minds open and free and cu­ri­ous… Then they will re­new enough to re­place what is lost through one win­dow. So there could be one left open.”

Will trem­bled with ex­cite­ment, and his mind leapt to a sin­gle point: to a new win­dow in the air be­tween his world and Lyra’s. And it would be their se­cret, and they could go through when­ev­er they chose, and live for a while in each oth­er’s worlds, not liv­ing ful­ly in ei­ther, so their dae­mons would keep their health; and they could grow up to­geth­er and maybe, much lat­er on, they might have chil­dren, who would be se­cret cit­izens of two worlds; and they could bring all the learn­ing of one world in­to the oth­er, they could do all kinds of good…

But Lyra was shak­ing her head.

“No,” she said in a qui­et wail, “we can’t, Will…

And he sud­den­ly knew her thought, and in the same an­guished tone, he said, “No, the dead…

“We must leave it open for them! We must!”

“Yes, oth­er­wise…”

“And we must make enough Dust for them, Will, and keep the win­dow open…

She was trem­bling. She felt very young as he held her to his side.

“And if we do,” he said shak­ily, “if we live our lives prop­er­ly and think about them as we do, then there’ll be some­thing to tell the harpies about as well. We’ve got to tell peo­ple that, Lyra.”

“The true sto­ries, yes,” she said, “the true sto­ries the harpies want to hear in ex­change. Yes. So if peo­ple live their whole lives and they’ve got noth­ing to tell about it when they’ve fin­ished, then they’ll nev­er leave the world of the dead. We’ve got to tell them that, Will.”

“Alone, though…”

“Yes,” she said, “alone.”

And at the word alone, Will felt a great wave of rage and de­spair mov­ing out­ward from a place deep with­in him, as if his mind were an ocean that some pro­found con­vul­sion had dis­turbed. All his life he’d been alone, and now he must be alone again, and this in­fi­nite­ly pre­cious bless­ing that had come to him must be tak­en away al­most at once. He felt the wave build high­er and steep­er to dark­en the sky, he felt the crest trem­ble and be­gin to spill, he felt the great mass crash­ing down with the whole weight of the ocean be­hind it against the iron­bound coast of what had to be. And he found him­self gasp­ing and shak­ing and cry­ing aloud with more anger and pain than he had ev­er felt in his life, and he found Lyra just as help­less in his arms. But as the wave ex­pend­ed its force and the wa­ters with­drew, the bleak rocks re­mained; there was no ar­gu­ing with fate; nei­ther his de­spair nor Lyra’s had moved them a sin­gle inch.

How long his rage last­ed, he had no idea. But even­tu­al­ly it had to sub­side, and the ocean was a lit­tle calmer af­ter the con­vul­sion. The wa­ters were still ag­itat­ed, and per­haps they would nev­er be tru­ly calm again, but the great force had gone.

They turned to the an­gel and saw she had un­der­stood, and that she felt as sor­row­ful as they did. But she could see far­ther than they could, and there was a calm hope in her ex­pres­sion, too.

Will sw­al­lowed hard and said, “All right. I’ll show you how to close a win­dow. But I’ll have to open one first, and make an­oth­er Specter. I nev­er knew about them, or else I’d have been more care­ful.”

“We shall take care of the Specters,” said Xapha­nia. Will took the knife and faced the sea. To his sur­prise, his hands were quite steady. He cut a win­dow in­to his own world, and they found them­selves look­ing at a great fac­to­ry or chem­ical plant, where com­pli­cat­ed pipe work ran be­tween build­in­gs and stor­age tanks, where lights glowed at ev­ery cor­ner, where wisps of steam rose in­to the air.

“It’s strange to think that an­gels don’t know the way to do this,” Will said.

“The knife was a hu­man in­ven­tion.”

“And you’re go­ing to close them all ex­cept one,” Will said. “All ex­cept the one from the world of the dead.”

“Yes, that is a promise. But it is con­di­tion­al, and you know the con­di­tion.”

“Yes, we do. Are there many win­dows to close?” “Thou­sands. There is the ter­ri­ble abyss made by the bomb, and there is the great open­ing Lord As­riel made out of his own world. They must both be closed, and they will. But there are many small­er open­in­gs, too, some deep un­der the earth, some high in the air, which came about in oth­er ways.”

“Baruch and Balthamos told me that they used open­in­gs like that to trav­el be­tween the worlds. Will an­gels no longer be able to do that? Will you be con­fined to one world as we are?” “No; we have oth­er ways of trav­el­ing.” “The way you have,” Lyra said, “is it pos­si­ble for us to learn?” “Yes. You could learn to do it, as Will’s fa­ther did. It us­es the fac­ul­ty of what you call imag­ina­tion. But that does not mean mak­ing things up. It is a form of see­ing.”

“Not re­al trav­el­ing, then,” said Lyra. “Just pre­tend…” “No,” said Xapha­nia, “noth­ing like pre­tend. Pre­tend­ing is easy. This way is hard, but much truer.”

“And is it like the alethiome­ter?” said Will. “Does it take a whole life­time to learn?”

“It takes long prac­tice, yes. You have to work. Did you think you could snap your fin­gers, and have it as a gift? What is worth hav­ing is worth work­ing for. But you have a friend who has al­ready tak­en the first steps, and who could help you.”

Will had no idea who that could be, and at that mo­ment he wasn’t in the mood to ask.

“I see,” he said, sigh­ing. “And will we see you again? Will we ev­er speak to an an­gel once we go back to our own worlds?”

“I don’t know,” said Xapha­nia. “But you should not spend your time wait­ing.”

“And I should break the knife,” said Will.

“Yes.”

While they had been speak­ing, the win­dow had been open be­side them. The lights were glow­ing in the fac­to­ry, the work was go­ing on; ma­chines were turn­ing, chem­icals were com­bin­ing, peo­ple were pro­duc­ing goods and earn­ing their liv­in­gs. That was the world where Will be­longed.

“Well, I’ll show you what to do,” he said.

So he taught the an­gel how to feel for the edges of the win­dow, just as Gi­aco­mo Par­adisi had shown him, sens­ing them at his fin­gers’ ends and pinch­ing them to­geth­er. Lit­tle by lit­tle the win­dow closed, and the fac­to­ry dis­ap­peared.

“The open­in­gs that weren’t made by the sub­tle knife,” Will said, “is it re­al­ly nec­es­sary to close them all? Be­cause sure­ly Dust on­ly es­capes through the open­in­gs the knife made. The oth­er ones must have been there for thou­sands of years, and still Dust ex­ists.”

The an­gel said, “We shall close them all, be­cause if you thought that any still re­mained, you would spend your life search­ing for one, and that would be a waste of the time you have. You have oth­er work than that to do, much more im­por­tant and valu­able, in your own world. There will be no trav­el out­side it any­more.”

What work have I got to do, then?” said Will, hut went on at once, “No, on sec­ond thought, don’t tell me. I shall de­cide what I do. If you say my work is fight­ing, or heal­ing, or ex­plor­ing, or what­ev­er you might say, I’ll al­ways he think­ing about it. And if I do end up do­ing that, I’ll be re­sent­ful be­cause it’ll feel as if I didn’t have a choice, and if I don’t do it, I’ll feel guilty be­cause I should. What­ev­er I do, I will choose it, no one else.”

“Then you have al­ready tak­en the first steps to­ward wis­dom,” said Xapha­nia.

“There’s a light out at sea,” said Lyra.

“That is the ship bring­ing your friends to take you home. They will be here to­mor­row.”

The word to­mor­row fell like a heavy blow. Lyra had nev­er thought she would be re­luc­tant to see Farder Coram, and John Faa, and Ser­afi­na Pekkala.

“I shall go now,” said the an­gel. “I have learned what I need­ed to know.”

She em­braced each of them in her light, cool arms and kissed their fore­heads. Then she bent to kiss the dae­mons, and they be­came birds and flew up with her as she spread her wings and rose swift­ly in­to the air. On­ly a few sec­onds lat­er she had van­ished.

A few mo­ments af­ter she had gone, Lyra gave a lit­tle gasp.

“What is it?” said Will.

“I nev­er asked her about my fa­ther and moth­er, and I can’t ask the alethiome­ter, ei­ther, now… I won­der if I’ll ev­er know?”

She sat down slow­ly, and he sat down be­side her.

“Oh, Will,” she said, “what can we do? What­ev­er can we do? I want to live with you for­ev­er. I want to kiss you and lie down with you and wake up with you ev­ery day of my life till I die, years and years and years away. I don’t want a mem­ory, just a mem­ory… “

“No,” he said, “mem­ory’s a poor thing to have. It’s your own re­al hair and mouth and arms and eyes and hands I want. I didn’t know I could ev­er love any­thing so much. Oh, Lyra, I wish this night would nev­er end! If on­ly we could stay here like this, and the world could stop turn­ing, and ev­ery­one else could fall in­to a sleep…”

“Ev­ery­one ex­cept us! And you and I could live here for­ev­er and just love each oth­er.”

“I will love you for­ev­er, what­ev­er hap­pens. Till I die and af­ter I die, and when I find my way out of the land of the dead, I’ll drift about for­ev­er, all my atoms, till I find you again…”

“I’ll be look­ing for you, Will, ev­ery mo­ment, ev­ery sin­gle mo­ment. And when we do find each oth­er again, we’ll cling to­geth­er so tight that noth­ing and no one’ll ev­er tear us apart. Ev­ery atom of me and ev­ery atom of you.. .We’ll live in birds and flow­ers and drag­on­flies and pine trees and in clouds and in those lit­tle specks of light you see float­ing in sun­beams… And when they use our atoms to make new lives, they won’t just be able to take one, they’ll have to take two, one of you and one of me, we’ll be joined so tight…”

They lay side by side, hand in hand, look­ing at the sky.

“Do you re­mem­ber,” she whis­pered, “when you first came in­to that cafe in Cit­tagazze, and you’d nev­er seen a dae­mon?”

“I couldn’t un­der­stand what he was. But when I saw you, I liked you straight­away be­cause you were brave.”

“No, I liked you first.”

“You didn’t! You fought me!”

“Well,” she said, “yes. But you at­tacked me.”

“I did not! You came charg­ing out and at­tacked me.”

“Yes, but I soon stopped.”

“Yes, but,” he mocked soft­ly.

He felt her trem­ble, and then un­der his hands the del­icate bones of her back be­gan to rise and fall, and he heard her sob qui­et­ly. He stroked her warm hair, her ten­der shoul­ders, and then he kissed her face again and again, and present­ly she gave a deep, shud­der­ing sigh and fell still.

The dae­mons flew back down now, and changed again, and came to­ward them over the soft sand. Lyra sat up to greet them, and Will mar­veled at the way he could in­stant­ly tell which dae­mon was which, nev­er mind what form they had. Pan­ta­lai­mon was now an an­imal whose name he couldn’t quite find: like a large and pow­er­ful fer­ret, red­gold in col­or, lithe and sin­uous and full of grace. Kir­ja­va was a cat again. But she was a cat of no or­di­nary size, and her fur was lus­trous and rich, with a thou­sand dif­fer­ent glints and shades of ink black, shad­ow gray, the blue of a deep lake un­der a noon sky, mist­laven­der­moon­light­fog… To see the mean­ing of the word sub­tle­ty, you had on­ly to look at her fur.

“A marten,” he said, find­ing the name for Pan­ta­lai­mon, “a pine marten.”

“Pan,” Lyra said as he flowed up on­to her lap, “you’re not go­ing to change a lot any­more, are you?”

“No,” he said.

“It’s fun­ny,” she said, “you re­mem­ber when we were younger and I didn’t want you to stop chang­ing at all…Well, I wouldn’t mind so much now. Not if you stay like this.”

Will put his hand on hers. A new mood had tak­en hold of him, and he felt res­olute and peace­ful. Know­ing ex­act­ly what he was do­ing and ex­act­ly what it would mean, he moved his hand from Lyra’s wrist and stroked the red­gold fur of her dae­mon.

Lyra gasped. But her sur­prise was mixed with a plea­sure so like the joy that flood­ed through her when she had put the fruit to his lips that she couldn’t protest, be­cause she was breath­less. With a rac­ing heart she re­spond­ed in the same way: she put her hand on the silky warmth of Will’s dae­mon, and as her fin­gers tight­ened in the fur, she knew that Will was feel­ing ex­act­ly what she was.

And she knew, too, that nei­ther dae­mon would change now, hav­ing felt a lover’s hands on them. These were their shapes for life: they would want no oth­er.

So, won­der­ing whether any lovers be­fore them had made this bliss­ful dis­cov­ery, they lay to­geth­er as the earth turned slow­ly and the moon and stars blazed above them.





The Amber Spyglass





THIRTY-EIGHT - THE BOTANIC GARDEN


The gyp­tians ar­rived on the af­ter­noon of the fol­low­ing day. There was no har­bor, of course, so they had to an­chor the ship some way out, and John Faa, Farder Coram, and the cap­tain came ashore in a launch with Ser­afi­na Pekkala as their guide.

Mary had told the mule­fa ev­ery­thing she knew, and by the time the gyp­tians were step­ping ashore on­to the wide beach, there was a cu­ri­ous crowd wait­ing to greet them. Each side, of course, was on fire with cu­rios­ity about the oth­er, but John Faa had learned plen­ty of cour­tesy and pa­tience in his long life, and he was de­ter­mined that these strangest of all peo­ple should re­ceive noth­ing but grace and friend­ship from the lord of the west­ern gyp­tians.

So he stood in the hot sun for some time while Sat­ta­max, the old za­lif, made a speech of wel­come, which Mary trans­lat­ed as best she could; and John Faa replied, bring­ing them greet­in­gs from the Fens and the wa­ter­ways of his home­land.

When they be­gan to move up through the marsh­es to the vil­lage, the mule­fa saw how hard it was for Farder Coram to walk, and at once they of­fered to car­ry him. He ac­cept­ed grate­ful­ly, and so it was that they came to the gath­er­ing ground, where Will and Lyra came to meet them.

Such an age had gone past since Lyra had seen these dear men! They’d last spo­ken to­geth­er in the snows of the Arc­tic, on their way to res­cue the chil­dren from the Gob­blers. She was al­most shy, and she of­fered her hand to shake, un­cer­tain­ly; but John Faa caught her up in a tight em­brace and kissed both her cheeks, and Farder Coram did the same, gaz­ing at her be­fore fold­ing her tight to his chest.

“She’s growed up, John,” he said. “Re­mem­ber that lit­tle girl we took to the north lands? Look at her now, eh! Lyra, my dear, if I had the tongue of an an­gel, I couldn’t tell you how glad I am to set eyes on you again.”

But she looks so hurt, he thought, she looks so frail and weary. And nei­ther he nor John Faa could miss the way she stayed close to Will, and how the boy with the straight black eye­brows was aware ev­ery sec­ond of where she was, and made sure he nev­er strayed far from her.

The old men greet­ed him re­spect­ful­ly, be­cause Ser­afi­na Pekkala had told them some­thing of what Will had done. For Will’s part, he ad­mired the mas­sive pow­er of Lord Faa’s pres­ence, pow­er tem­pered by cour­tesy, and he thought that that would be a good way to be­have when he him­self was old; John Faa was a shel­ter and a strong refuge.

“Dr. Mal­one,” said John Faa, “we need to take on fresh wa­ter, and what­ev­er in the way of food your friends can sell us. Be­sides, our men have been on board ship for a fair while, and we’ve had some fight­ing to do, and it would be a bless­ing if they could all have a run ashore so they can breathe the air of this land and tell their fam­ilies at home about the world they voy­aged to.”

“Lord Faa,” said Mary, “the mule­fa have asked me to say they will sup­ply ev­ery­thing you need, and that they would be hon­ored if you could all join them this evening to share their meal.”

“It’ll be our great plea­sure to ac­cept,” said John Faa.

So that evening the peo­ple of three worlds sat down to­geth­er and shared bread and meat and fruit and wine. The gyp­tians pre­sent­ed their hosts with gifts from all the cor­ners of their world: with crocks of gen­niv­er, carv­in­gs of wal­rus ivory, silken tapestries from Turkestan, cups of sil­ver from the mines of Sve­den, enam­eled dish­es from Corea.

The mule­fa re­ceived them with de­light, and in re­turn of­fered ob­jects of their own work­man­ship: rare ves­sels of an­cient knot wood, lengths of the finest rope and cord, lac­quered bowls, and fish­ing nets so strong and light that even the Fendwelling gyp­tians had nev­er seen the like.

Hav­ing shared the feast, the cap­tain thanked his hosts and left to su­per­vise the crew as they took on board the stores and wa­ter that they need­ed, be­cause they meant to sail as soon as morn­ing came. While they were do­ing that, the old za­lif said to his guests:

“A great change has come over ev­ery­thing. And as a to­ken, we have been grant­ed a re­spon­si­bil­ity. We would like to show you what this means.”

So John Faa, Farder Coram, Mary, and Ser­afi­na went with them to the place where the land of the dead opened, and where the ghosts were com­ing out, still in their end­less pro­ces­sion. The mule­fa were plant­ing a grove around it, be­cause it was a holy place, they said; they would main­tain it for­ev­er; it was a source of joy.

“Well, this is a mys­tery,” said Farder Coram, “and I’m glad I lived long enough to see it. To go in­to the dark of death is a thing we all fear; say what we like, we fear it. But if there’s a way out for that part of us that has to go down there, then it makes my heart lighter.”

“You’re right, Coram,” said John Faa. “I’ve seen a good many folk die; I’ve sent more than a few men down in­to the dark my­self, though it was al­ways in the anger of bat­tle. To know that af­ter a spell in the dark we’ll come out again to a sweet land like this, to be free of the sky like the birds, well, that’s the great­est promise any­one could wish for.”

“We must talk to Lyra about this,” said Farder Coram, “and learn how it came about and what it means.”

Mary found it very hard to say good­bye to Atal and the oth­er mule­fa. Be­fore she board­ed the ship, they gave her a gift: a lac­quer phial con­tain­ing some of the wheel tree oil, and most pre­cious of all, a lit­tle bag of seeds.

They might not grow in your world, Atal said, but if not, you have the oil. Don’t for­get us, Mary.

Nev­er, Mary said. Nev­er. If I live as long as the witch­es and for­get ev­ery­thing else, I’ll nev­er for­get you and the kind­ness of your peo­ple, Atal.

So the jour­ney home be­gan. The wind was light, the seas were calm, and al­though they saw the glit­ter of those great snow white wings more than once, the birds were wary and stayed well clear. Will and Lyra spent ev­ery hour to­geth­er, and for them the two weeks of the voy­age passed like the blink of an eye­lid.

Xapha­nia had told Ser­afi­na Pekkala that when all the open­in­gs were closed, then the worlds would all be re­stored to their prop­er re­la­tions with one an­oth­er, and Lyra’s Ox­ford and Will’s would lie over each oth­er again, like trans­par­ent im­ages on two sheets of film be­ing moved clos­er and clos­er un­til they merged, al­though they would nev­er tru­ly touch.

At the mo­ment, how­ev­er, they were a long way apart, as far as Lyra had had to trav­el from her Ox­ford to Cit­tagazze. Will’s Ox­ford was here now, just a knife cut away. It was evening when they ar­rived, and as the an­chor splashed in­to the wa­ter, the late sun lay warm­ly on the green hills, the ter­ra­cot­ta roofs, that el­egant and crum­bling wa­ter­front, and Will and Lyra’s lit­tle cafe. A long search through the cap­tain’s tele­scope had shown no signs of life what­so­ev­er, but John Faa planned to take half a dozen armed men ashore just in case.

They wouldn’t get in the way, but they were there if they were need­ed.

They ate a last meal to­geth­er, watch­ing the dark­ness fall. Will said good­bye to the cap­tain and his of­fi­cers, and to John Faa and Farder Coram. He had hard­ly seemed to be aware of them, and they saw him more clear­ly than he saw them: they saw some­one young, but very strong, and deeply strick­en.

Fi­nal­ly Will and Lyra and their dae­mons, and Mary and Ser­afi­na Pekkala, set off through the emp­ty city. And it was emp­ty; the on­ly foot­falls and the on­ly shad­ows were their own. Lyra and Will went ahead, hand in hand, to the place where they had to part, and the wom­en stayed some way be­hind, talk­ing like sis­ters.

“Lyra wants to come a lit­tle way in­to my Ox­ford,” Mary said. “She’s got some­thing in mind. She’ll come straight back af­ter­wards.”

“What will you do, Mary?”

“Me, go with Will, of course. We’ll go to my flat, my house, tonight, and then to­mor­row we’ll go and find out where his moth­er is, and see what we can do to help her get bet­ter. There are so many rules and reg­ula­tions in my world, Ser­afi­na; you have to sat­is­fy the au­thor­ities and an­swer a thou­sand ques­tions; I’ll help him with all the le­gal side of things and the so­cial ser­vices and hous­ing and all that, and let him con­cen­trate on his moth­er. He’s a strong boy…But I’ll help him. Be­sides, I need him. I haven’t got a job any­more, and not much mon­ey in the bank, and I wouldn’t be sur­prised if the po­lice are af­ter me…He’ll be the on­ly per­son in my whole world that I can talk to about all this.”

They walked on through the silent streets, past a square tow­er with a door­way open­ing in­to dark­ness, past a lit­tle cafe where ta­bles stood on the pave­ment, and out on­to a broad boule­vard with a line of palm trees in the cen­ter.

“This is where I came through,” said Mary.

The win­dow Will had first seen in the qui­et sub­ur­ban road in Ox­ford opened here, and on the Ox­ford side it was guard­ed by po­lice, or had been when Mary tricked them in­to let­ting her through. She saw Will reach the spot and move his hands deft­ly in the air, and the win­dow van­ished.

“That’ll sur­prise them next time they look,” she said.

It was Lyra’s in­ten­tion to go in­to Will and Mary’s Ox­ford and show Will some­thing be­fore re­turn­ing with Ser­afi­na, and ob­vi­ous­ly they had to be care­ful where they cut through; so the wom­en fol­lowed on be­hind, through the moon­lit streets of Cit­tagazze. On their right a wide and grace­ful park­land led up to a great house with a clas­si­cal por­ti­co as bril­liant as ic­ing sug­ar un­der the moon.

“When you told me the shape of my dae­mon,” Mary said, “you said you could teach me how to see him, if we had time…I wish we had.”

“Well, we have had time,” Ser­afi­na said, “and haven’t we been talk­ing? I’ve taught you some witchlore, which would be for­bid­den un­der the old ways in my world. But you are go­ing back to your world, and the old ways have changed. And I, too, have learned much from you. Now then: when you spoke to the Shad­ows on your com­put­er, you had to hold a spe­cial state of mind, didn’t you?”

“Yes…just as Lyra did with the alethiome­ter. Do you mean if I try that?”

“Not on­ly that, but or­di­nary see­ing at the same time. Try it now.”

In Mary’s world they had a kind of pic­ture that looked at first like ran­dom dots of col­or but that, when you looked at it in a cer­tain way, seemed to ad­vance in­to three di­men­sions: and there in front of the pa­per would be a tree, or a face, or some­thing else sur­pris­ing­ly sol­id that sim­ply wasn’t there be­fore.

What Ser­afi­na taught Mary to do now was sim­ilar to that. She had to hold on to her nor­mal way of look­ing while si­mul­ta­ne­ous­ly slip­ping in­to the trance­like open dream­ing in which she could see the Shad­ows. But now she had to hold both ways to­geth­er, the ev­ery­day and the trance, just as you have to look in two di­rec­tions at once to see the 3-D pic­tures among the dots.

And just as it hap­pens with the dot pic­tures, she sud­den­ly got it.

“Ah!” she cried, and reached for Ser­afi­na’s arm to steady her­self, for there on the iron fence around the park­land sat a bird: glossy black, with red legs and a curved yel­low bill: an Alpine chough, just as Ser­afi­na had de­scribed. It, he, was on­ly a foot or two away, watch­ing her with his head slight­ly cocked, for all the world as though he was amused.

But she was so sur­prised that her con­cen­tra­tion slipped, and he van­ished.

“You’ve done it once, and next time it will be eas­ier,” Ser­afi­na said. “When you are in your world, you will learn to see the dae­mons of oth­er peo­ple, too, in the same way. They won’t see yours or Will’s, though, un­less you teach them as I’ve taught you.”

“Yes…Oh, this is ex­traor­di­nary. Yes!”

Mary thought: Lyra talked to her dae­mon, didn’t she? Would she hear this bird as well as see him? She walked on, glow­ing with an­tic­ipa­tion.

Ahead of them Will was cut­ting a win­dow, and he and Lyra wait­ed for the wom­en to pass through so that he could close it again.

“D’you know where we are?” Will said.

Mary looked around. The road they were in now, in her world, was qui­et and tree­lined, with big Vic­to­ri­an hous­es in shrub­filled gar­dens.

“Some­where in north Ox­ford,” Mary said. “Not far from my flat, as a mat­ter of fact, though I don’t know ex­act­ly which road this is.”

“I want to go to the Botan­ic Gar­den,” Lyra said.

“All right. I sup­pose that’s about fif­teen min­utes’ walk. This way…”

Mary tried the dou­ble­see­ing again. She found it eas­ier this time, and there was the chough, with her in her own world, perch­ing on a branch that hung low over the pave­ment. To see what would hap­pen, she held out her hand, and he stepped on­to it with­out hes­ita­tion. She felt the slight weight, the tight grip of the claws on her fin­ger, and gen­tly moved him on­to her shoul­der. He set­tled in­to place as if he’d been there all her life.

Well, he has, she thought, and moved on.

There was not much traf­fic in the High Street, and when they turned down the steps op­po­site Mag­dalen Col­lege to­ward the gate of the Botan­ic Gar­den, they were com­plete­ly alone. There was an or­nate gate­way, with stone seats in­side it, and while Mary and Ser­afi­na sat there, Will and Lyra climbed over the iron fence in­to the gar­den it­self. Their dae­mons slipped through the bars and flowed ahead of them in­to the gar­den.

“It’s this way,” said Lyra, tug­ging at Will’s hand.

She led him past a pool with a foun­tain un­der a widespread­ing tree, and then struck off to the left be­tween beds of plants to­ward a huge manytrunk­ed pine. There was a mas­sive stone wall with a door­way in it, and in the far­ther part of the gar­den, the trees were younger and the plant­ing less for­mal. Lyra led him al­most to the end of the gar­den, over a lit­tle bridge, to a wood­en seat un­der a spread­ing, low­branched tree.

“Yes!” she said. “I hoped so much, and here it is, just the same.. .Will, I used to come here in my Ox­ford and sit on this ex­act same bench when­ev­er I want­ed to be alone, just me and Pan. What I thought was that if you, maybe just once a year, if we could come here at the same time, just for an hour or some­thing, then we could pre­tend we were close again, be­cause we would be close, if you sat here and I sat just here in my world…

“Yes,” he said, “as long as I live, I’ll come back. Wher­ev­er I am in the world, I’ll come back here…

“On Mid­sum­mer Day,” she said. “At mid­day. As long as I live. As long as I live…”

He found him­self un­able to see, but he let the hot tears flow and just held her close.

“And if we, lat­er on, ” she was whis­per­ing shak­ily, “if we meet some­one that we like, and if we mar­ry them, then we must be good to them, and not make com­par­isons all the time and wish we were mar­ried to each oth­er in­stead…But just keep up this com­ing here once a year, just for an hour, just to be to­geth­er…”

They held each oth­er tight­ly. Min­utes passed; a wa­ter­bird on the riv­er be­side them stirred and called; the oc­ca­sion­al car moved over Mag­dalen Bridge.

Fi­nal­ly they drew apart.

“Well,” said Lyra soft­ly.

Ev­ery­thing about her in that mo­ment was soft, and that was one of his fa­vorite mem­ories lat­er on, her tense grace made ten­der by the dim­ness, her eyes and hands and es­pe­cial­ly her lips, in­fi­nite­ly soft. He kissed her again and again, and each kiss was near­er to the last one of all.

Heavy and soft with love, they walked back to the gate. Mary and Ser­afi­na were wait­ing.

“Lyra… Will said.

And she said, “Will.”

He cut a win­dow in­to Cit­tagazze. They were deep in the park­land around the great house, not far from the edge of the for­est. He stepped through for the last time and looked down over the silent city, the tiled roofs gleam­ing in the moon­light, the tow­er above them, the light­ed ship wait­ing out on the still sea.

He turned to Ser­afi­na and said as stea­di­ly as he could, “Thank you, Ser­afi­na Pekkala, for res­cu­ing us at the belvedere, and for ev­ery­thing else. Please be kind to Lyra for as long as she lives. I love her more than any­one has ev­er been loved.”

In an­swer the witch queen kissed him on both cheeks. Lyra had been whis­per­ing to Mary, and then they, too, em­braced, and first Mary and then Will stepped through the last win­dow, back in­to their own world, in the shade of the trees of the Botan­ic Gar­den.

Be­ing cheer­ful starts now, Will thought as hard as he could, but it was like try­ing to hold a fight­ing wolf still in his arms when it want­ed to claw at his face and tear out his throat; nev­er­the­less, he did it, and he thought no one could see the ef­fort it cost him.

And he knew that Lyra was do­ing the same, and that the tight­ness and strain in her smile were the signs of it.

Nev­er­the­less, she smiled.

One last kiss, rushed and clum­sy so that they banged cheek­bones, and a tear from her eye was trans­ferred to his face; their two dae­mons kissed farewell, and Pan­ta­lai­mon flowed over the thresh­old and up in­to Lyra’s arms; and then Will be­gan to close the win­dow, and then it was done, the way was closed, Lyra was gone.

“Now… he said, try­ing to sound mat­terof­fact, but hav­ing to turn away from Mary all the same, “I’ve got to break the knife.”

He searched the air in the fa­mil­iar way un­til he found a gap, and tried to bring to mind just what had hap­pened be­fore. He had been about to cut a way out of the cave, and Mrs. Coul­ter had sud­den­ly and un­ac­count­ably re­mind­ed him of his moth­er, and the knife had bro­ken be­cause, he thought, it had at last met some­thing it couldn’t cut, and that was his love for her.

So he tried it now, sum­mon­ing an im­age of his moth­er’s face as he’d last seen her, fear­ful and dis­tract­ed in Mrs. Coop­er’s lit­tle hall­way.

But it didn’t work. The knife cut eas­ily through the air and opened in­to a world where they were hav­ing a rain­storm: heavy drops hur­tled through, startling them both. He closed it again quick­ly and stood puz­zled for a mo­ment.

His dae­mon knew what he should do, and said sim­ply, “Lyra.”

Of course. He nod­ded, and with the knife in his right hand, he pressed with his left the spot where her tear still lay on his cheek.

And this time, with a wrench­ing crack, the knife shat­tered and the blade fell in pieces to the ground, to glit­ter on the stones that were still wet with the rain of an­oth­er uni­verse.

Will knelt to pick them up care­ful­ly, Kir­ja­va with her cat eyes help­ing to find them all.

Mary was shoul­der­ing her ruck­sack.

“Well,” she said, “well, lis­ten now, Will. We’ve hard­ly spo­ken, you and I…So we’re still strangers, large­ly. But Ser­afi­na Pekkala and I made a promise to each oth­er, and I made a promise to Lyra just now, and even if I hadn’t made any oth­er promis­es, I’d make a promise to you about the same thing, which is that if you’ll let me, I’ll be your friend for the rest of our lives. We’re both on our own, and I reck­on we could both do with that sort of… What I mean to say is, there isn’t any­one else we can talk to about all this, ex­cept each oth­er…And we’ve both got to get used to liv­ing with our dae­mons, too…And we’re both in trou­ble, and if that doesn’t give us some­thing in com­mon, I don’t know what will.”

“You’re in trou­ble?” said Will, look­ing at her. Her open, friend­ly, clever face looked back di­rect­ly.

“Well, I smashed up some prop­er­ty in the lab be­fore I left, and I forged an iden­ti­ty card, and…It’s noth­ing we can’t deal with. And your trou­ble, we can deal with that, too. We can find your moth­er and get her some prop­er treat­ment. And if you need some­where to live, well, if you wouldn’t mind liv­ing with me, if we can ar­range that, then you won’t have to go in­to, what­ev­er they call it, in­to care. I mean, we’ll have to de­cide on a sto­ry and stick to it, but we could do that, couldn’t we?”

Mary was a friend. He had a friend. It was true. He’d nev­er thought of that.

“Yes!” he said.

“Well, let’s do it. My flat’s about half a mile away, and you know what I’d like most of all in the world? I’d like a cup of tea. Come on, let’s go and put the ket­tle on.”

Three weeks af­ter the mo­ment Lyra had watched Will’s hand clos­ing his world away for­ev­er, she found her­self seat­ed once more at that din­ner ta­ble in Jor­dan Col­lege where she had first fall­en un­der the spell of Mrs. Coul­ter.

This time it was a small­er par­ty: just her­self and the Mas­ter and Dame Han­nah Relf, the head of St. Sophia’s, one of the wom­en’s col­leg­es. Dame Han­nah had been at that first din­ner, too, and if Lyra was sur­prised to see her here now, she greet­ed her po­lite­ly, and found that her mem­ory was at fault: for this Dame Han­nah was much clev­er­er, and more in­ter­est­ing, and kindli­er by far than the dim and frumpy per­son she re­mem­bered.

All kinds of things had hap­pened while Lyra was away, to Jor­dan Col­lege, to Eng­land, to the whole world. It seemed that the pow­er of the Church had in­creased great­ly, and that many bru­tal laws had been passed, but that the pow­er had waned as quick­ly as it had grown: up­heavals in the Mag­is­teri­um had top­pled the zealots and brought more lib­er­al fac­tions in­to pow­er. The Gen­er­al Obla­tion Board had been dis­solved; the Con­sis­to­ri­al Court of Dis­ci­pline was con­fused and lead­er­less.

And the col­leg­es of Ox­ford, af­ter a brief and tur­bu­lent in­ter­lude, were set­tling back in­to the calm of schol­ar­ship and rit­ual. Some things had gone: the Mas­ter’s valu­able col­lec­tion of sil­ver had been loot­ed; some col­lege ser­vants had van­ished. The Mas­ter’s manser­vant, Cousins, was still in place, how­ev­er, and Lyra had been ready to meet his hos­til­ity with de­fi­an­ce, for they had been en­emies as long as she could re­mem­ber. She was quite tak­en aback when he greet­ed her so warm­ly and shook her hand with both of his: was that af­fec­tion in his voice? Well, he had changed.

Dur­ing din­ner the Mas­ter and Dame Han­nah talked of what had hap­pened in Lyra’s ab­sence, and she lis­tened in dis­may, or sor­row, or won­der. When they with­drew to his sit­ting room for cof­fee, the Mas­ter said:

“Now, Lyra, we’ve hard­ly heard from you. But I know you’ve seen many things. Are you able to tell us some­thing of what you’ve ex­pe­ri­enced?”

“Yes,” she said. “But not all at once. I don’t un­der­stand some of it, and some makes me shud­der and cry still; but I will tell you, I promise, as much as I can. On­ly you have to promise some­thing, too.”

The Mas­ter looked at the gray­haired la­dy with the mar­moset dae­mon in her lap, and a flick­er of amuse­ment passed be­tween them.

“What’s that?” said Dame Han­nah.

“You have to promise to be­lieve me,” Lyra said se­ri­ous­ly. “I know I haven’t al­ways told the truth, and I could on­ly sur­vive in some places by telling lies and mak­ing up sto­ries. So I know that’s what I’ve been like, and I know you know it, but my true sto­ry’s too im­por­tant for me to tell if you’re on­ly go­ing to be­lieve half of it. So I promise to tell the truth, if you promise to be­lieve it.”

“Well, I promise,” said Dame Han­nah.

The Mas­ter said, “And so do I.”

“But you know the thing I wish,” Lyra said, “al­most, al­most more than any­thing else? I wish I hadn’t lost the way of read­ing the alethiome­ter. Oh, it was so strange, Mas­ter, how it came in the first place and then just left! One day I knew it so well, I could move up and down the sym­bol mean­in­gs and step from one to an­oth­er and make all the con­nec­tions, it was like…” She smiled, and went on, “Well, I was like a mon­key in the trees, it was so quick. Then sud­den­ly, noth­ing. None of it made sense; I couldn’t even re­mem­ber any­thing ex­cept just ba­sic mean­in­gs, like the an­chor means hope and the skull means death. All those thou­sands of mean­in­gs…Gone.”

“They’re not gone, though, Lyra,” said Dame Han­nah. “The books are still in Bod­ley’s Li­brary. The schol­ar­ship to study them is alive and well.”

Dame Han­nah was sit­ting op­po­site the Mas­ter in one of the two arm­chairs be­side the fire­place, Lyra on the so­fa be­tween them. The lamp by the Mas­ter’s chair was all the light there was, but it showed the ex­pres­sions of the two old peo­ple clear­ly. And it was Dame Han­nah’s face that Lyra found her­self study­ing. Kind­ly, Lyra thought, and sharp, and wise; but she could no more read what it meant than she could read the alethiome­ter.

“Well, now,” the Mas­ter went on. “We must think about your fu­ture, Lyra.”

His words made her shiv­er. She gath­ered her­self and sat up.

“All the time I was away,” Lyra said, “I nev­er thought about that. All I thought about was just the time I was in, just the present. There were plen­ty of times when I thought I didn’t have a fu­ture at all. And now… Well, sud­den­ly find­ing I’ve got a whole life to live, but no…but no idea what to do with it, well, it’s like hav­ing the alethiome­ter but no idea how to read it. I sup­pose I’ll have to work, but I don’t know at what. My par­ents are prob­ably rich, but I bet they nev­er thought of putting any mon­ey aside for me. And any­way, I think they must have used all their mon­ey up by now, so even if I did have a claim on it, there wouldn’t be any left. I don’t know, Mas­ter. I came back to Jor­dan be­cause this used to be my home, and I didn’t have any­where else to go. I think King Iorek Byr­ni­son would let me live on Sval­bard, and I think Ser­afi­na Pekkala would let me live with her witch clan; but I’m not a bear and I’m not a witch, so I wouldn’t re­al­ly fit in there, much as I love them. Maybe the gyp­tians would take me in…But re­al­ly I don’t know what to do any­more. I’m lost, re­al­ly, now.”

They looked at her: her eyes were glit­ter­ing more than usu­al, her chin was held high with a look she’d learned from Will with­out know­ing it. She looked de­fi­ant as well as lost, Dame Han­nah thought, and ad­mired her for it; and the Mas­ter saw some­thing else, he saw how the child’s un­con­scious grace had gone, and how she was awk­ward in her grow­ing body. But he loved the girl dear­ly, and he felt half­proud and half in awe of the beau­ti­ful adult she would be, so soon.

He said, “You will nev­er be lost while this col­lege is stand­ing, Lyra. This is your home for as long as you need it. As for mon­ey, your fa­ther made over an en­dow­ment to care for all your needs, and ap­point­ed me ex­ecu­tor; so you needn’t wor­ry about that.”

In fact, Lord As­riel had done noth­ing of the sort, but Jor­dan Col­lege was rich, and the Mas­ter had mon­ey of his own, even af­ter the re­cent up­heavals.

“No,” he went on, “I was think­ing about learn­ing. You’re still very young, and your ed­uca­tion un­til now has de­pend­ed on…well, quite frankly, on which of our schol­ars you in­tim­idat­ed least,” he said, but he was smil­ing. “It’s been hap­haz­ard. Now, it may turn out that in due course your tal­ents will take you in a di­rec­tion we can’t fore­see at all. But if you were to make the alethiome­ter the sub­ject of your life’s work, and set out to learn con­scious­ly what you could once do by in­tu­ition…

“Yes,” said Lyra def­inite­ly.

“…then you could hard­ly do bet­ter than put your­self in the hands of my good friend Dame Han­nah. Her schol­ar­ship in that field is un­matched.”

“Let me make a sug­ges­tion,” said the la­dy, “and you needn’t re­spond now. Think about it for a while. Now, my col­lege is not as old as Jor­dan, and you’re too young yet to be­come an un­der­grad­uate in any case, but a few years ago we ac­quired a large house in north Ox­ford, and we de­cid­ed to set up a board­ing school. I’d like you to come and meet the head­mis­tress and see whether you’d care to be­come one of our pupils. You see, one thing you’ll need soon, Lyra, is the friend­ship of oth­er girls of your age. There are things that we learn from one an­oth­er when we’re young, and I don’t think that Jor­dan can pro­vide quite all of them. The head­mis­tress is a clever young wom­an, en­er­get­ic, imag­ina­tive, kind­ly. We’re lucky to have her. You can talk to her, and if you like the idea, come and make St. Sophia’s your school, as Jor­dan is your home. And if you’d like to be­gin study­ing the alethiome­ter sys­tem­at­ical­ly, you and I could meet for some pri­vate lessons. But there’s time, my dear, there’s plen­ty of time. Don’t an­swer me now. Leave it un­til you’re ready.”

“Thank you,” said Lyra, “thank you, Dame Han­nah, I will.”

The Mas­ter had giv­en Lyra her own key to the gar­den door so she could come and go as she pleased. Lat­er that night, just as the porter was lock­ing the lodge, she and Pan­ta­lai­mon slipped out and made their way through the dark streets, hear­ing all the bells of Ox­ford chim­ing mid­night.

Once they were in the Botan­ic Gar­den, Pan ran away over the grass chas­ing a mouse to­ward the wall, and then let it go and sprang up in­to the huge pine tree near­by. It was de­light­ful to see him leap­ing through the branch­es so far from her, but they had to be care­ful not to do it when any­one was look­ing; their painful­ly ac­quired witch pow­er of sep­arat­ing had to stay a se­cret. Once she would have rev­eled in show­ing it off to all her urchin friends, and mak­ing them gog­gle with fear, but Will had taught her the val­ue of si­lence and dis­cre­tion.

She sat on the bench and wait­ed for Pan to come to her. He liked to sur­prise her, but she usu­al­ly man­aged to see him be­fore he reached her, and there was his shad­owy form, flow­ing along be­side the riv­er­bank. She looked the oth­er way and pre­tend­ed she hadn’t seen him, and then seized him sud­den­ly when he leapt on­to the bench.

“I near­ly did it,” he said.

“You’ll have to get bet­ter than that. I heard you com­ing all the way from the gate.”

He sat on the back of the bench with his forepaws rest­ing on her shoul­der.

“What are we go­ing to tell her?” he said.

“Yes,” she said. “It’s on­ly to meet this head­mis­tress, any­way. It’s not to go to the school.”

“But we will go, won’t we?”

“Yes,” she said, “prob­ably.”

“It might be good.”

Lyra won­dered about the oth­er pupils. They might be clev­er­er than she was, or more so­phis­ti­cat­ed, and they were sure to know a lot more than she did about all the things that were im­por­tant to girls of their age. And she wouldn’t be able to tell them a hun­dredth of the things that she knew. They’d be bound to think she was sim­ple and ig­no­rant.

“D’you think Dame Han­nah can re­al­ly do the alethiome­ter?” said Pan­ta­lai­mon.

“With the hooks, I’m sure she can. I won­der how many books there are? I bet we could learn them all, and do with­out. Imag­ine hav­ing to car­ry a pile of books ev­ery­where… Pan?”

“What?”

“Will you ev­er tell me what you and Will’s dae­mon did while we were apart?”

“One day,” he said. “And she’ll tell Will, one day. We agreed that we’d know when the time had come, but we wouldn’t tell ei­ther of you till then.”

“All right,” she said peace­ably.

She had told Pan­ta­lai­mon ev­ery­thing, but it was right that he should have some se­crets from her, af­ter the way she’d aban­doned him.

And it was com­fort­ing to think that she and Will had an­oth­er thing in com­mon. She won­dered whether there would ev­er come an hour in her life when she didn’t think of him, didn’t speak to him in her head, didn’t re­live ev­ery mo­ment they’d been to­geth­er, didn’t long for his voice and his hands and his love. She had nev­er dreamed of what it would feel like to love some­one so much; of all the things that had as­ton­ished her in her ad­ven­tures, that was what as­ton­ished her the most. She thought the ten­der­ness it left in her heart was like a bruise that would nev­er go away, but she would cher­ish it for­ev­er.

Pan slipped down to the bench and curled up on her lap. They were safe to­geth­er in the dark, she and her dae­mon and their se­crets. Some­where in this sleep­ing city were the books that would tell her how to read the alethiome­ter again, and the kind­ly and learned wom­an who was go­ing to teach her, and the girls at the school, who knew so much more than she did.

She thought, They don’t know it yet, but they’re go­ing to be my friends.

Pan­ta­lai­mon mur­mured, “That thing that Will said…”

“When?”

“On the beach, just be­fore you tried the alethiome­ter. He said there wasn’t any else­where. It was what his fa­ther had told you. But there was some­thing else.”

“I re­mem­ber. He meant the King­dom was over, the King­dom of Heav­en, it was all fin­ished. We shouldn’t live as if it mat­tered more than this life in this world, be­cause where we are is al­ways the most im­por­tant place.”

“He said we had to build some­thing…”

“That’s why we need­ed our full life, Pan. We would have gone with Will and Kir­ja­va, wouldn’t we?”

“Yes. Of course! And they would have come with us. But…

“But then we wouldn’t have been able to build it. No one could if they put them­selves first. We have to be all those dif­fi­cult things like cheer­ful and kind and cu­ri­ous and pa­tient, and we’ve got to study and think and work hard, all of us, in all our dif­fer­ent worlds, and then we’ll build…”

Her hands were rest­ing on his glossy fur. Some­where in the gar­den a night­in­gale was singing, and a lit­tle breeze touched her hair and stirred the leaves over­head. All the dif­fer­ent bells of the city chimed, once each, this one high, that one low, some close by, oth­ers far­ther off, one cracked and pee­vish, an­oth­er grave and sonorous, but agree­ing in all their dif­fer­ent voic­es on what the time was, even if some of them got to it a lit­tle more slow­ly than oth­ers. In that oth­er Ox­ford where she and Will had kissed good­bye, the bells would be chim­ing, too, and a night­in­gale would be singing, and a lit­tle breeze would be stir­ring the leaves in the Botan­ic Gar­den.

“And then what?” said her dae­mon sleep­ily. “Build what?”

“The Re­pub­lic of Heav­en,” said Lyra.

THE END





